

===PAGE===

Guidelines on
 
Members of Parliament
 
Local Area Development Scheme
 
(MPLADS)
 
Government of India 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
 
Sardar Patel Bhavan, Parliament Street, New Delhi- 110001 
Website : www.mplads.nic.in
 
June 2016
 

===PAGE===

CONTENTS 
S. No. Subject Page No. 
1. Message from Hon’ble Minister .................................................................
 ii 
2. Preface by Secretary MOSPI ......................................................................
 iii 
3. Important Telephone Nos ............................................................................
 iv 
4. Background .................................................................................................
 1 
5. Features ....................................................................................................... 2
 
6. Implementation ............................................................................................ 6
 
7. Fund Release & Management ...................................................................... 18
 
8. Accounting Procedure .................................................................................. 24
 
9. Monitoring ................................................................................................... 26
 
10. Application of the Guidelines ...................................................................... 30
 
11. Annexure-I .................................................................................................. 31
 
12. Annexure-II .................................................................................................. 32
 
13. Annexure-IIA ............................................................................................... 34
 
14. Annexure-III ................................................................................................. 44
 
15. Annexure-IV A............................................................................................. 45
 
16. Annexure-IVB ............................................................................................. 47
 
17. Annexure-IVC .............................................................................................. 49
 
18. Annexure-IVD .............................................................................................. 51
 
19. Annexure-IVE .............................................................................................. 53
 
20. Annexure-V ................................................................................................... 59
 
21. Annexure-VI .................................................................................................. 61
 
22. Annexure-VII ................................................................................................. 64
 
23. Annexure-VIII ............................................................................................... 65
 
24. Annexure-IX .................................................................................................. 66
 
25. Annexure-X ...................................................................................................
 68 
26. Annexure-XA ...............................................................................................
 71 
27. Annexure-XB ...............................................................................................
 72 
28. Annexure-XI .................................................................................................
 73 
29. Annexure-XII ................................................................................................
 74 
i 

===PAGE===

iiiii
 

===PAGE===

PREFACE 
Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme is for Development works and 
creation of durable community assets. Individual benefits and movable & non-durable assets 
(certain exemptions excepted) are generally not allowed under the scheme.  The emphasis is on 
creation of durable community assets based on locally felt needs in the arenas of roads, electricity, 
drinking water, health and education etc. 
The recommendations of the works are made by the Members of Parliament for the betterment 
of the community. These works are executed by District Authorities in accordance with the 
respective State Government’s financial, technical and administrative rules. 
Implementation of the scheme is governed by the Guidelines on MPLADS which were first 
issued in February 1994 and have been updated from time to time. Last updation was in May 2014. 
The current issue is based on the circulars issued thereafter, keeping in view the recommendation 
of the   Parliamentary committees on MPLADS, observations made by comptroller and Auditor 
General of India, suggestions received from Members of Parliament & other stakeholders and 
feedback received from the State Governments during Review Meetings 
The Guidelines on MPLADS June 2016 include instructions for implementation of the 
schemes announced by the Hon’ble Prime Minister such as Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Accessible 
India Campaign (Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan), conservation of water through rain water harvesting 
and Sansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana etc. 
I wish to convey my sincere thanks to the staff and Officers of the Ministry and hope that 
compilation will prove to be useful to the Hon’ble Members of Parliament, District Authorities 
and States/UT Governments. 
(T.C.A. ANANT)
 
viii 

===PAGE===

     
      
        
       
        
      
    
       
    
     
      
    
 
  
       
      
       
      
  
       
     
       
      
IMPORTANT TELEPHONE NUMBERS
 
Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
 
Name/Designation Telephone (O) 
MOS (S & PI) 23340884, 23340739 
23367245, 23747135 (Fax) 
PS to MOS 23340884, 23340739 
23367245, 23747135 (Fax) 
Secretary, MOSPI 23742150, 23344689, 23742067 (Fax) 
Additional Secretary, MOSPI 23344551, 23362878 (Fax) 
AS & FA 23384360, 23389388, 23381363 (Fax) 
Deputy Director General (PI) 23746725, 23746725 (Fax) 
Director (MPLADS) 23344933, 23364197 (Fax) 
Director (IFD) 23364196 
Joint Director (MPLADS) 23364193 
Lok Sabha Committee on MPLADS 
Chairman 23034115, 23017576 (Fax) 
Joint Secretary 23035571, 23035569 
Director 23035383, 23034866 
Deputy Secretary 23034013 
Rajya Sabha Committee on MPLADS 
Chairman 23017371, 23034689, 23012559 (Fax) 
Additional Secretary 23034206 
Director 23034201 
Joint Director 23035425 
viiiv 

===PAGE===

1 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
       
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
GUIDELINES ON 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA
 
DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
 
1. BACKGROUND
 
1.1 	 The general public approach Members of Parliament (MPs) for provision of certain basic 
facilities to meet the felt needs of the people. 
1.2	 On 23rd December 1993 Prime Minister had announced the Members of Parliament Local 
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) in the Parliament.  Initially the MPLADS was under 
the control of the Ministry of Rural Development. The 1st Guidelines were issued in February 
1994, covering the concept, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme. The MPLAD 
Scheme was transferred to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation in 
October 1994. The Guidelines were subsequently revised in December 1994, February 
1997, September 1999, April 2002, November 2005, August 2012 and lastly in May 2014. 
The present comprehensive revision of guidelines is based on the experience gained over 
22 years and having considered the suggestions made by the various stakeholders including 
Members of Parliament, both the Committees of the Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha, NABARD 
consultancy services (NABCONS) and Comptroller and Auditor General of India in its 
Reports. 
1.3	 The objective of the scheme is to enable MPs to recommend works of developmental 
nature with emphasis on the creation of durable community assets based on the locally felt 
needs to be taken up in their Constituencies. Right from inception of the Scheme, durable 
assets of national priorities viz. drinking water, primary education, public health, sanitation 
and roads, etc. are being created. 
1.4	 In 1993-94, when the Scheme was launched, an amount of Rs. 5 lakh per Member of 
Parliament was allotted which became Rupees one crore per annum per MP constituency 
from 1994-95. This was stepped up to Rs. 2 crore from 1998-99 and now it is Rs.5 crore 
from the financial year 2011-12. 
1.5	 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has been responsible for the policy 
formulation, release of funds and prescribing monitoring mechanism for implementation 
of the Scheme. A Department in each State/UT is designated as the Nodal Department with 
the overall responsibility of supervision, monitoring and coordination of the MPLADS 
implementation with the districts and other Line Departments. The Government of India 
informs the State Nodal Department about the MPLADS funds released to the District 
Authorities. The District Authorities report the status of MPLADS implementation to the 
Government of India and State Nodal Department. 

===PAGE===

2 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
2. Features
 
2.1	 The MPLADS is a Plan Scheme fully funded by Government of India. The annual MPLADS 
fund entitlement per MP constituency is Rs. 5 crore. 
2.2	 Lok Sabha Members can recommend works within their Constituencies and Elected 
Members of Rajya Sabha can recommend works within the State of Election except as 
provided in paras 2.8 and 2.9. Nominated Members of both the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha 
can recommend works anywhere in the country. 
2.3	 A Member of Parliament shall give his choice of Nodal District in Annexure I of the 
guidelines to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation with copy to the 
State Government and to the District Magistrate of the chosen District. If a Lok Sabha 
Constituency is spread over more than one District, the Member of Parliament can choose 
any one of the Districts as Nodal District in his/her constituency. The Rajya Sabha MP can 
choose any District in his/her State of Election as Nodal District. Nominated Members of 
both Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha can choose any District in the country as Nodal District. 
2.4	 All works to meet locally felt infrastructure and development needs, with an emphasis on 
creation of durable assets in the constituency are permissible under MPLADS except those 
prohibited in Annexure-II. Expenditure on specified items of non durable nature are also 
permitted as per list in the Annexure-IIA. 
2.5	 Development of Areas inhabited by Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe: There is 
a greater need to develop areas inhabited by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
order to give special attention for the infrastructure development of such areas. M.Ps are 
to recommend every year, works costing at least 15 per cent of the MPLADS entitlement 
for the year for areas inhabited by Scheduled Caste population and 7.5 per cent for areas 
inhabited by S.T. population.  In other words, out of an amount of Rs.5 crores, a M.P. shall 
recommend for areas inhabited by S.C. population, Rs.75 lacs and Rs.37.5 lacs for areas 
inhabited by S.T. population. In case there is insufficient tribal population in the area of 
Lok Sabha Member, they may recommend this amount for the creation of community 
assets in tribal areas outside of their constituency but within their State of election. In case 
a State  does not have S.T. inhabited areas, this amount may be utilized in S.C. inhabited 
areas and vice-versa. It shall be the responsibility of the district authority to enforce the 
provision of the guideline. In order to facilitate implementation of this guideline, it will 
be responsibility of the district authority keeping in view the extant provisions of State 
and Central Government’s to declare areas eligible for utilization for funds meant for the 
benefit of SC & ST population. 

===PAGE===

3 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
2.5.1	 The additional amount of Rs.25 lakh to be spent in the tribal areas only: In order to 
encourage trusts and societies for the betterment of tribal people, the ceiling of Rs. 50 lakh 
stipulated for building assets by trusts and societies in Para 3.21.2 of the Guidelines, will 
be enhanced by 50% to Rs. 75 lakh subject to conditions (a) The community building work 
are primarily for the benefit of tribal people in tribal areas. (b) The works undertaken and 
the beneficiary Trust/Society should satisfy all other conditions of Guidelines of MPLADS. 
In the Tribal areas and notified Scheduled areas where transferring land title is not 
possible, the MPLADS works for the creation of  community assets may be guided by the 
same practice through  which the State Government undertake the creation of all other 
public works like schools, hospitals, roads, etc. under other Central/State Government 
developmental scheme. This will, however, be subject to the conditions that an undertaking 
will be given by the land owner that he will not claim any right on such land or the assets 
created thereon once the land is given to the Government for public use and that there will 
be free access for use of the asset by all members of community besides fulfillment of all 
other conditions of the MPLADS Guidelines. 
2.5.2	 In case any constituency faces difficulty in implementing the provisions relating to SC/ST 
as stipulated in the Guidelines of MPLADS, owing to inadequate SC/ST population, the 
exemption from the stipulated provision for utilization of MPLADS funds can be made by 
the concerned Nodal District Authority with the prior approval of the Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. The concerned Nodal District Authority, in consultation 
with the MP concerned, should send a justified and logical proposal, through the State 
Government, seeking utilization of the stipulated amount for the welfare of the other 
economically deprived sections of population in the constituency. 
2.5.3	 The District Authorities should maintain information and data on implementation of the 
provision for SC/ST areas including inter changeability of funds and also furnish the same 
on quarterly basis to the nodal department of the State Government. 
2.6 	 Recommendation/Sanction of the works: Each MP will recommend works up to the 
annual entitlement during the financial year in the format at Annexure-III to the concerned 
District Authority. The District Authority will get the eligible sanctioned works executed as 
per the established procedure of the State Government. (in the matter of technical sanction, 
tender/non-tender, schedule of rates, etc. However, powers to grant administrative sanction/ 
approval will continue to remain with District Authority). 
2.7	 Natural & Man-made Calamities: MPLADS works can also be implemented in the areas 
prone to or affected by the calamities like floods, cyclone, Tsunami, earthquake, hailstorm, 
avalanche, cloud burst, pest attack, landslides, tornado, drought, fire, chemical, biological 
and radiological hazards. Lok  Sabha MPs from the non-affected areas of the State can also 

===PAGE===

4 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
 
  
 
recommend permissible works up to a maximum of Rs.25 lakh per annum in the affected 
area(s) in that State. The funds would be released by the Nodal district of the MP concerned 
to the District Authority of the affected district. MPLADS funds may be pooled by the 
District Authority of the affected district for works permissible in the Guidelines. The 
amount so transferred from the nodal district to the natural calamity affected district may be 
shown in the UCs as well as MPRs as amount transferred to natural calamity affected district 
for rehabilitation work. The Works Completion Report, Audit Certificate and Utilization 
Certificate for such works and funds will be provided by the District Authority of the 
affected districts directly to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation for 
overall reconciliation. No separate UC/AC/Completion Report in respect of the transferred 
amount would be required from the Nodal District authority in this regard while processing 
release of subsequent installment of MPLADS funds. 
2.7.1	 The Nodal Department shall identify the rehabilitation works within a period of one month 
of commitment of MPLADS funds and the rehabilitation works should be completed by 
the concerned District Authority within 8 months of the approval of the works. In case 
more time is required to complete the works, the Nodal Department, in consultation with 
MOSPI, may allow such additional time as may be reasonable for completion of the works. 
2.8	 In the event of “Calamity of severe nature” in any part of the country, an MP can recommend 
works up to a maximum of Rs.1 crore for the affected district. Whether a calamity is of 
severe nature or not, will be decided by the Government of India. The funds in this regard 
will be released by the District Authority of Nodal district of the MP concerned to the 
District Authority of the affected district to get permissible works done. The amount so 
transferred from the nodal district to the natural calamity affected district may be shown 
in the UCs as well as MPRs as amount transferred to natural calamity affected district 
for rehabilitation work. The Works Completion Report, Audit Certificate and Utilization 
Certificate for such works and funds will be provided by the District Authority of the 
affected districts directly to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation for 
overall reconciliation. No separate UC/AC/Completion Report in respect of the transferred 
amount would be required from the Nodal District authority in this regard while processing 
release of subsequent installment of MPLADS funds. 
2.8.1 	 The Nodal Department shall identify the rehabilitation works within a period of one month 
of commitment of MPLADS funds and the rehabilitation works should be completed by 
the concerned District Authority within 8 months of the approval of the works. In case 
more time is required to complete the work, the Nodal Department, in consultation with 
MOSPI, may allow more time for completion of works. 
2.9	 Contribution of MPLADS funds to a place outside MPs constituency or outside his 
State/UT: If an elected Member of Parliament finds the need to contribute MPLADS funds 

===PAGE===

5 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
to a place outside that State/UT, or outside the constituency within the State, or both, the MP 
can recommend eligible works under these Guidelines up to a maximum of Rs. 25 lakh in 
a financial year. Such a gesture on the part of an MP will promote national unity, harmony, 
and fraternity among the people at the grassroots level. In such cases the Nodal District 
Authority will be fully responsible for coordination and other functions bestowed on him 
in the Guidelines. The Completion Report, Utilization Certificate and Audit Certificate 
for such works will be provided by the Implementing District Authority to the respective 
Nodal District Authority from whom the funds were received. 
2.9.1	 Provided that the contribution outside the constituency/State will not be allowed for Trusts/ 
Societies and Cooperative Societies. 
2.10	 District Authority: District Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner will 
generally be the District Authority to implement MPLADS in the district. If the District 
Planning Committee is empowered by the State Government, the Chief Executive Officer of 
the District Planning Committee can function as the District Authority. In case of Municipal 
Corporations, the Commissioner/Chief Executive Officer may function as the District 
Authority. In this regard, if there is any doubt, Government of India in consultation with 
the State/UT Government, will decide the District Authority for the purpose of MPLADS 
implementation. 
2.11	 Implementing Agency: 
(a)	 The District Authority shall make the selection of an appropriate Implementing 
Agency through which a particular work recommended by an MP would be executed; 
(b)	 The selection of the Implementing Agency shall be undertaken in accordance with 
the State Government rules/guidelines applicable for the purpose. Provided that 
for certain works in certain Central Government Ministries/Organizations (like 
Railways) where the Implementing Agency has necessarily to be the concerned 
Central Government Ministry/Organization, the same shall be selected as the 
Implementing Agency. 

===PAGE===

6 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
       
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
3. 	 IMPLEMENTATION 
3.1	 Each MP shall recommend eligible work on the MP’s letter head duly signed by the MP 
A letter format from the MP to the district authority is at Annexure-III.  Recommendations 
by third parties and representatives of MP’s are not admissible and cannot be acted upon. 
3.2	 In case a constituency comprises of more than one district and the MP wishes to recommend 
works in the district other than the Nodal District, in such cases the works list in the 
prescribed format shall be given to the District Authority of the Nodal District with copy 
to the District Authority in whose jurisdiction the proposed works are to be executed. 
The District Authority in whose jurisdiction, the proposed works are to be executed, will 
maintain proper accounts, follow proper procedure for sanction and implementation for 
timely completion of works. The District Authority will furnish monthly progress reports, 
work completion reports, and audit certificates for such works to the Nodal District 
Authority. 
3.3	 The District Authority shall identify the Implementing Agency capable of executing the 
eligible work qualitatively, timely and satisfactorily. The District Authority shall follow 
the established work scrutiny; technical, work estimation, tendering and administrative 
procedure of the State/UT Government concerned in the matter of work execution and 
shall be responsible for timely and effective implementation of such works. 
3.3.1 	 Completion of abandoned/suspended works: In case, there is still any abandoned/ 
suspended MPLAD work under the Scheme, it shall be completed by the State Government 
from their own funds. The State Government will also fix responsibility and take necessary 
disciplinary action against the erring officials. The District Authority may ensure that the 
funds must have been utilized as sanctioned earlier so that duplication of allocation of 
funds does not take place. 
3.4	 The work and the site selected for the work execution by the MP shall not be changed, 
except with the concurrence of the MP concerned, but change will not be allowed once the 
work has commenced and expenditure liability incurred. 
3.5	 Where the District Authority considers that a recommended work cannot be executed due 
to some reason, the District Authority shall inform the reasons to the MP concerned, under 
intimation to the Government of India and the State/UT Government as early as possible 
but not later than 45 days from the date of receipt of the proposal. 
3.6	 The District Authority should get in advance a firm commitment about the operation, 
upkeep and maintenance of the proposed asset from the User Agency concerned before the 
execution of the work is sanctioned. 

===PAGE===

7 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
3.7	 The District Authority may sanction works as per the recommendation of the MP up to 
the full entitlement. However, the release of funds will be regulated as specified in these 
Guidelines. 
3.8	 If the estimated amount for a work is more than the amount indicated by the MP for the 
same, MP’s further consent is necessary before the sanction is accorded. 
3.9	 The work should be sanctioned and executed only if the MP concerned has allocated the 
full estimated cost of the work in the year. If the commitment for the full estimated amount 
is not forthcoming and the amount recommended by the MP is less than the estimates 
for the work and there are no other sources from which the deficit can be made good, 
then the work should not be sanctioned, as in such an eventuality, the project will remain 
incomplete for want of sufficient funds. The shortfall in the estimated cost vis-à-vis the one 
recommended by the MP should be intimated to the MP as early possible but not later than 
75 days of the receipt of the proposal. 
3.10	 In case, recommendations received by the District Authority exceeds the entitlement of the 
MP, priority will be as per the principle of first received to be first considered. 
3.11	 All works for which recommendations are received in the office of the District Authority 
till the last date of the term of the MP are to be executed, provided these are as per norms 
and within the entitlement of MPLADS funds of the MP. 
3.12	 All recommended eligible works should be sanctioned within 75 days from the date of 
receipt of the recommendation, after completing all formalities. The District Authority 
shall, however, inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of 
receipt of recommendations, with reasons thereof. 
In case of the time limits mentioned in the section falling within the period of operation of 
model code of conduct notified by the Election Commission, then such period as notified 
by model code of conduct will not be included in the reckoning of time limits. 
3.13	 The sanction letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of the work to the 
Implementation Agency. The time limit for completion of the works should generally not 
exceed one year. In exceptional cases, where the implementation time exceeds one year, 
specific reasons for the same shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/order. The sanction 
letter/order shall also include a clause for suitable action against the Implementation 
Agency in the event of their failure to complete the work within the stipulated time as per 
the State Government Procedure. A copy of the sanction letter/order shall be sent to the MP 
concerned. 
3.14	 Decision making powers in regard to technical, financial and administrative sanctions to 
be accorded under the Scheme, vest in the district level functionaries. To facilitate quick 

===PAGE===

8 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
implementation of projects under this Scheme, full powers should be delegated by the State/ 
UT Governments to the district functionaries. The District Authorities will have full powers 
to get the works technically approved and financial estimates prepared by the competent 
district functionaries before according the final administrative sanction and approval. 
The District Authority should, before sanctioning the work, ensure that all clearances for 
such works have been taken from the competent authorities and the work conforms to the 
Guidelines. 
3.15	 The work, once recommended by the MP and sanctioned by the District Authority may be 
cancelled if so desired by the MP, only if the execution of the work has not commenced and 
the cancellation does not lead to any contractual financial liability/cost on the Government. 
If for some compelling reasons, stoppage/abandonment of a work in progress becomes 
inevitable, the matter should be referred to the State Nodal Department with full justification 
for a decision under intimation to the Government of India and to the MP concerned. 
Such works cannot be changed by MP even if the MP is reelected. It shall be the responsibility 
of the Nodal District Authority to scrutinize all such recommended works within 75 days 
of the last date of the term of office of the MP to accord necessary sanction as per the 
Guidelines and rejection, if any, to be intimated to the outgoing/former MP within 45 days 
with reasons. 
Nothing in this clause will allow any successor MP to cancel any otherwise eligible works 
recommended by his predecessor. 
3.16	 On receipt of  the recommendation of the works  from the MP,  and issue of the work 
sanction order by the District Authority, the District Authority should ensure that details 
of the work sanctioned are entered in the Input Format (Annexure-IV A, B, C, D and E) 
and uploaded in the MPLADS website (www.mplads.nic.in). All works already executed 
or under execution need to go through similar process and all entries would be made in 
a time bound manner. The Software Manual for Monitoring of Works under MPLADS is 
available on the website. 
3.17	 MPLAD Scheme can be converged in individual/stand-alone projects of other Central and 
State Government schemes provided such works of Central/State Governments Schemes 
are eligible under MPLADS. Funds from local bodies can similarly also be pooled with 
MPLADS works. Wherever such pooling is done, funds from other scheme sources should 
be used first and the MPLADS funds should be released later, so that MPLADS fund 
results in completion of the project. 
3.17.1 Special provision for convergence of Members of Parliament Local Area Development 
(MPLADS) with MGNREGA: Funds from Member of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme (MPLADS) can be converged with MGNREGA with the objective 
of creating more durable assets. 

===PAGE===

9 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(The detailed procedure may be seen at Annexure-IIA) 
3.17.2 Special provision for convergence of Members of Parliament Local Area Development 
(MPLADS) with Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports: 
Funds from Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) can be 
converged with Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports with the 
objective of creating more durable assets. 
(The detailed procedure may be seen at Annexure-IIA)  
3.18	 The MPs may recommend augmentation by certain amount out of his MPLADS funds in 
a Centrally sponsored Scheme against central plus State share indicating the geographical 
area where to be implemented and the amount recommended, but will not be permitted to 
indicate the beneficiaries, who will continue to be as per any prior list/priority list already 
drawn up by the District Authority, and the list would not require a change on the request 
of the MP. 
3.19	 Public and community contribution to the works recommended by MPs is permissible. In 
such cases, MPLADS funds will be limited to the estimated amount minus the public and 
community contribution. 
3.20	 There are Central and State Government Schemes which provide for the public and 
community contribution. MPLADS funds shall not be used to substitute the public and 
community contribution in any Central/State Government Programme/Scheme, which 
includes a component of such contribution. 
3.21	 Community infrastructure and public utility building works are also permissible for 
registered Societies/Trusts under the Scheme, provided that the Society/Trust is engaged in 
the social service/welfare activity and has been in existence for the preceding three years. 
The existence of the Society/Trust shall be reckoned from the date it started its activities in 
the field, or the date of registration under the relevant Registration Act, whichever is later. 
The beneficiary Society/Trust shall be a well established, public spirited, nonprofit making 
entity, enjoying a good reputation in the area. Whether such a society/trust is well reputed or 
not, should be decided by the District Authority concerned on the basis of relevant factors, 
like performance in the field of social service, welfare activities, non-profit orientation of 
its activities, transparency of its activities and sound financial position. 
3.21.1 The ownership of the land may remain with the Society/Trust, but the structure constructed 
with MPLADS funds shall be the property of State/UT Government. The Society/Trust 
shall undertake to operate, maintain and up keep the asset created under MPLADS at its 
cost. If at any time, it is found that the asset created with MPLADS funds is not being used 
for the purpose for which the asset was funded, the State/UT Government may take over 

===PAGE===

10 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
the asset and proceed to recover from the Society/Trust, the cost incurred from MPLADS 
for the creation of asset along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum calculated with 
effect from the date of use of MPLADS fund for the works concurred. A formal agreement 
(a model agreement form is at Annexure-V) will be executed by the Society/Trust with the 
District Authority in favour of the Government in advance for the purpose. This agreement 
will be registered under the relevant Registration Act on a non judicial stamp paper of 
Rs.10 or more, as is applicable in the State/UT. No stamp duty would be required to be paid 
for registration as there is no formal transfer of assets. 
3.21.2 Not more than Rs.50 lakh, can be spent from MPLADS fund, for one or more works of 
a particular Society/Trust in the lifetime of that Society/Trust. If a Society has already 
availed of MPLADS funds upto Rs. 50 lakh, no more funds can be recommended for that 
Society/Trust under the Scheme. From the financial year 2012-13, an MP can recommend 
funds, only upto Rs. one crore in all, in a financial year from MPLADS funds for works 
to Societies/Trusts. The recommendation made by Hon’ble MPs for the period prior to the 
financial year 2012-13 is to be regulated as per the guidelines existing during that period. 
3.21.3 The MPLADS funding is not permissible to a Society/Trust, if the recommending MP or 
any of his/her family members is the President/Chairman or Member of the Managing 
Committee or Trustee of the registered Society/Trust in question. Family members would 
include MP and MPs spouse which would comprise their parents, brothers and sisters, 
children, grandchildren and their spouses and their in-laws. MPs may ensure the spirit of 
the guidelines is maintained by avoiding circular or mutual funding of Trusts/Societies. 
3.21.4 Further, when funds are recommended towards a Society/Trust by a Member of Parliament 
and clarifications/documents as required under the Guidelines for scrutiny before 
sanctioning are requested by the District Authorities, the said Society/Trust should provide 
the requisite documents within a maximum period of three months from the date of receipt 
of the letter from the district administration. In case the documents are not received even 
after a period of three months, the district administration can send two reminders within 
a month. If the required information is still not received, the recommendation by the MP 
towards the Society/Trust may be treated as cancelled by the district administration and 
intimation of the same may be given to the recommending MP. 
3.21.5 Relaxed provision for most deprived segments: For trusts/societies that run charitable 
residential homes for orphans (anathalaya/yateemkhana), charitable residential homes for 
old/aged persons, charitable residential homes for widows, charitable residential homes/ 
colonies for lepers, charitable residential homes for blind persons, charitable residential 
homes for spastic/mentally retarded children or charitable residential homes for deaf and 
dumb children, the restriction of getting MPLADS funds upto Rs.50 lakh in their life­
time will stand relaxed to Rs.1 crore. The total funds received from MPLADS under this 

===PAGE===

11 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
    
  
 
 
relaxed dispensation will be used only in and for the charitable and residential home/colony 
mentioned afore (and not for any other purpose of the trust/society concerned). And the 
funds will be utilised only for the purposes provided for in para 3.21 of the Guidelines. 
3.21.6 Compulsory cent percent audit of all the works executed under the MPLADS of all the 
Trusts/Societies receiving MPLADS funds during the year will be undertaken by the 
auditors who audit the MPLADS funds annually in the districts and a certificate to that 
effect will also be included in the ‘Audit Certificate’ provided for under Annexure-IX of 
the Guidelines on MPLADS. 
3.22	 As soon as a work under the Scheme is completed, it should be put to public use. For 
greater public awareness, for all works executed under MPLADS a plaque (stone/metal) 
carrying the inscription ‘Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme Work’ 
indicating the cost involved, the commencement, completion and inauguration date and the 
name of the MP sponsoring the project should be permanently erected. A sample of plaque 
is at Annexure-XI. 
3.23	 List of all completed and ongoing works with MPLADS funds should also be displayed 
at the District Authority Office and posted in the website for information of the general 
public. For public awareness, details of completed works may be displayed in prominent 
places like Tehsil/Niabat/Sub-Tehsil/Block/Gram Panchayat offices also. 
3.24	 As per the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 and the Rules framed there 
under, all citizens have the right to information on any aspect of the MPLAD Scheme and 
the works recommended/sanctioned/executed under it. This may include any information 
on works recommended by the MPs, works sanctioned/not sanctioned, cost of works 
sanctioned, Implementing Agencies, quality of work completed, User’s Agency etc. The 
District Authorities are responsible to provide such information to the public in the manner 
as required under the Right to Information Act 2005. 
3.25	 Ambulances/Hearse Vans are allowed to be purchased by the District Authority/District 
Chief Medical Officer on the recommendation of a Member of Parliament. 
(The detailed procedure may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.25.1 Vehicles to Transport Animals: Purchase of Ambulances for sick/injured animals in 
Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Parks. 
3.25.2 Ambulances for sick/injured animals are also allowed to be purchased by the District 
Authority in Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Parks on the recommendation of a Member 
of Parliament (para 3.25.1). The scope is now widened to allow purchase of ambulances 
for transporting sick/injured animals in the District. 

===PAGE===

12 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
   
  
 
 
            
  
 
 
          
 
 
(Detailed procedure may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.26	 Minimum amount for a project: The minimum amount sanctioned under the MPLAD 
Scheme for any project or work should normally not be less than Rs. 1 lakh. If, however, the 
District Authority is of the considered view that the work of less amount will be beneficial 
to the public at large, he/she may sanction the same, even if the cost of the work is less than 
Rs. 1 lakh. 
3.27	 Shelf of Projects: The District Authority shall maintain and make available a “Shelf of 
Projects” including projects for SC/ST inhabited areas to MPs. The Shelf of Projects should 
be suggestive only, so that it provides, flexibility to the MP, to go beyond the list in order 
to meet the felt needs of the people. The district authority may receive suggestions from 
Panchayati Raj Institutions and local bodies. 
3.28	 Utilisation of MPLADS Fund for welfare of the differently abled persons: MPs may 
recommend upto a maximum of Rs.10 lakhs per year OR the consolidated entitled amount 
of their balance tenure, effective from the financial year 2011-12, at any time from their 
MPLADS fund for giving assistance to the physically challenged. Such assistance will be 
given only for the purchase of tricycles (manual/battery operated/motorized), motorized/ 
battery operated wheelchair and artificial limbs for differently abled deserving persons.  
Grant of artificial limb, etc can be given only by one Hon’ble MP to one person and that 
other Hon’ble MPs cannot then add further grants to the same person. Clubbing of grants 
by Hon’ble MPs to one person is not permissible under the MPLADS. 
(Detailed procedure may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.29	 Purchase of books for schools, colleges and public library: Books to the extent of             
Rs. 22 lakh can be purchased for schools, colleges and public libraries belonging to Central, 
States, UTs and Local Self-Government from MPLADS Fund. 
(The details of ceiling for such purchase may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.30	 Purchase of computers: Purchase of computers is permissible for Government and 
Government aided educational institutions. 
(Detailed provision may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.30.1 	Purchase of Visual Display Units:  Procurement / installation of Visual Display Units is 
permissible for Government and Government aided educational institutions. 
3.31	 Purchase of mobile library from MPLADS funds:  Purchase of mobile library for 
educational institutes belonging to Central, State, UT and Local Self Government are 
permissible for Government and Government aided educational institutions. 

===PAGE===

13 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
3.32	 New borings in place of hand pumps installed under MPLAD Scheme:  New borings 
in lieu of the existing non-functional hand-pumps using the re-usable components of the 
parts of the non-functional hand pumps are permissible. 
(The conditions on which new borings are permissible may be seen in Annexure-IIA) 
3.33	 Special provisions: For works in border areas, coastal and other environmentally sensitive 
areas (like forests, wild life, CRZ, eco-fragile areas, etc.) appropriate permission from the 
concerned Ministries and agencies will be needed. 
3.33.1 Specific clearance from Ministry of Water Resources would invariably be required before 
sanctioning any work for irrigation, flood control etc. under the MPLAD Scheme on any 
river within 8 kilometers of international border. 
3.34	 Creation of a Facilitation Centre at each District: An MP would be entitled for setting 
up of MPLADS Facilitation Centre in the Nodal District for which space/room would 
be provided by the DC/DM in the premises of either the DRDA or the CDO Office/ 
CEO, District Panchayat Office. The capital cost of setting up of such facilities including 
equipments, furniture, etc. shall not exceed Rs. 5 lakh and will be met from MPLADS 
funds. 
(Detailed functions and other instructions may be seen at Annexure-IIA) 
3.34.1 The main function of the facilitation centre would be to provide to the Hon’ble MPs all 
the information at one place relevant for the effective implementation of the scheme. If a 
District has been opted by more than one MP, the facilitation centre will provide service to 
all these MPs. The facilitation centre should work under the direct control of the District 
Authority. The supervision is envisaged from the existing officers in the DRDA or the CDO 
office/CEO District Panchayat Office (wherever space is provided). A lone Data Entry 
Operator, if necessary, may be engaged, through outsourcing/contract from within the 
2% administrative charges. If a Data Entry Operator is engaged, the engagement shall be 
strictly casual (outsourced/contractual), it shall not be against any post and shall not, in any 
form, be construed as government employment. That no liability, administrative or legal or 
financial, accrues on the Government (State or Central) in future, shall be the responsibility 
of the District Authority that makes the engagement.          
3.35 	 Construction of Railway Halt Station: Funds from MPLAD Scheme if so nominated by 
MP can be used for construction of Railway Halt Station to facilitate the local community 
for boarding/de-boarding from the train. 
(Detailed instructions may be seen at Annexure-IIA) 

===PAGE===

14 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
                    
 
 
3.36	 One MP - One Idea: In order to foster a grass-root bottoms-up approach to innovation 
and development and to arrive at solutions for local problems, which are sustainable and 
scalable, there is a need for seeking out and campaigning for ideas that have the potential 
to solve challenges. Accordingly, based on the innovative ideas received from the local 
people regarding developmental projects, a ‘One MP – One Idea’ Competition may be 
held in each Lok Sabha constituency annually to select the three best innovations for cash 
awards and certificate of appreciation for next five best innovations. 
These awards will be given on the specific request of Hon’ble MPs to promote such a 
scheme in their constituency. The announcement calling for applications in prescribed 
format would be made by the Nodal District Authority through various media viz. print, 
radio, television etc. It must be ensured that the announcement details are put up on the 
relevant website(s) as well. The Competition will invite innovative solutions in the areas 
of education of skills, health, water and sanitation, housing and infrastructure, agriculture, 
energy, environment, community and social service, etc. The innovative solutions can be 
submitted by any individual or by a group of individuals, industry, industry consortia, 
academia, NOG or other institution from the constituency. The format for submission of 
application is given at Annexure-X. All entries will follow the same screening process. 
3.36.1 A Selection Committee may be set up with the mandate to screen all applications. The 
Selection Committee shall be headed by the DC/DM of the Nodal District and shall 
consist of eight members from (i) Engineering, (ii) Finance, (iii) Health and Sanitation, 
(iv) Academia,  (v) Industry (vi) Banking and Financial Institutions and (vii) two members 
from Social sector/NGOs to be nominated by Hon’ble MP. The members from Engineering, 
Finance, Health and Sanitation sectors will be nominated by DC/DM and should be from 
the Central/State/UT Government. The members from Academia, Industry and Banking 
& Financial Institutions shall be of repute & distinction in their own field and shall be 
nominated by DC/DM. The Selection Committee will select the three best innovations for 
cash awards and next five best innovations for certificate of appreciation. In the event a 
large number of applications are received, DC/DM, in consultation with Hon’ble MP, may 
constitute a Screening Committee for initial screening of the potential applications for 
further evaluation by the Selection Committee. 
3.36.2 Cash awards of Rs. 2.5 lakhs, Rs. 1.5 lakhs and Rs. 1 lakh will be awarded to the first, second 
and third prize winner respectively. In addition to the award money, other administrative 
expenditure involved in arranging such events including issuing advertisements, holding 
meetings, etc., subject to a maximum of 10% of the total awards’ amount of Rs. 5 lakhs, 
Rs. 50,000/- will also be permissible under the MPLADS Guidelines. The total amount 
of awards of Rs. 5 lakhs and administrative expenditure of Rs 50,000/- will be debited to 
the MPLADS funds of the Hon’ble MP promoting the Scheme. In order to ensure that the 
scheme would be able to foster a spirit of innovation and grass-root level competitiveness 

===PAGE===

15 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
  
    
 
   
        
  
  
    
 
  
   
   
   
and spur the innovation movement in the country by involving a large cross section of 
people, the award function should be given a wide publicity. The awards shall be given 
away by the Hon’ble MP in a public function with adequate media coverage. A Certificate 
of honour as per Annexure-XA will be given to the awardees. The Certificate of appreciation 
as per Annexure-XB will also be given to the next 5 best innovations. 
3.37	 Providing assistance to aided educational institutions: MPs may recommend their 
MPLADS funds to aided educational Institutions which are receiving financial assistance 
from state government and are recognized by a State/UT/Central Board of Secondary 
Education in the case of schools and by State/Central University in case of colleges and 
are not charging commercial fee from students. Such aided educational institutions are 
eligible for receiving MPLADS funds for all permissible items under the Guidelines with 
no ceiling. 
3.37.1 Both aided and un-aided educational institutions which are recognized by a Board of 
Secondary Education/University and are run by trusts/societies are eligible for receiving 
MPLADS funds for all permissible items under the Guidelines; the particular trust/society 
which runs the concerned educational institution will be governed by the maximum ceiling 
imposed on trusts/societies under the Guidelines (para 3.21) [that is, Rs. 50 lakh to one 
particular trust/society in its life-time (as also that one honourable MP can recommend 
only upto Rs. 1 crore in one financial year to all trusts/societies taken together)] 
3.38 	 Assistance to Bar Associations: MPs may recommend their MPLADS funds to the 
Bar Association at the Tehsil/Sub-Division/District level for construction of Building of 
the Bar Association provided land for it belongs to the Central, State/UT or Local Self 
Government or belongs to the Bar Association within the concerned court premises and 
subject to the provisions of Para 3.21 of the Guidelines on MPLADS.  No MPLADS funds 
will be permissible for the recurring expenditure of the Bar Association. 
3.38.1 Assistance to Bar Association Library for purchase of books: Subject to provisions of 
para 3.38 above and para 3.21 of the MPLADS Guidelines, MPs may recommend MPLADS 
funds to Bar Association Library for purchase of books upto Rs. 50,000/-(Rs. fifty thousand 
only) per annum for Lower and District Courts (courts at Tehsil/Sub-division/District level. 
(Detailed procedure and instructions may be seen at Annexure-IIA) 
3.39	 Bio-digesters developed by the DRDO: Bio-digesters developed by the DRDO are 
permissible to be installed at railway stations, railway coaches, anganwadi centres, schools, 
health centres, hospitals, bus stands, and other community facilities belonging to Central, 
State/UT and Local Self Government. 

===PAGE===

16 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
3.40	 Providing Fixed Weighing scale Machine under the MPLAD Scheme: Members of 
Parliament may recommend installation of fixed Weighing scale Machines for agricultural 
and horticulture produce at village level, subject to the following conditions:­
i)	 The Weighing Machine shall be installed on land belonging to Central, State/UT or 
Local Self Government; 
ii) It should be owned, operated and maintained by the Gram Panchayats; 
iii) The access to Weighing Machine would be for all villagers of the Panchyat. All 
Commercial organizations, such as factories, firms, shops and other commercial 
establishments etc. would not have access to the Weighing Machine; 
iv)	 The Weighing Machine should be used either free of charge or on no profit/no loss 
basis. If required, only nominal charges can be charged, which would be used for the 
upkeep of the machine. No commercial transaction/operation should be carried out 
through the asset; 
v)	 No recurring expenses would be permissible. 
3.41 	 Providing CCTV Camera System for security surveillance at  Strategic locations 
in the country: Members of Parliament may recommend MPLADS funds for installing 
CCTV Camera System for security surveillance at Strategic locations in the country, on 
the request of district police/district administration/Government security agencies. Subject 
to the following conditions:­
a)	 the Surveillance/CCTV Camera System may be installed in fixed manner at places 
belonging to Central State/UT or Local Self Government; 
b)	 A Committee under DC/DM with representative of District Police/District 
Administration/Government security agency may select the equipment which would 
be procured as per the prescribed State procedure. 
c)	 The equipments purchased from MPLADS funds will be maintained by the user agency 
and no recurring expenses would be permissible. 
3.42	 Cooperative Societies: 
(i) Cooperative societies will be eligible for assistance under MPLADS at par with 
registered trusts/societies. 
(ii) The cooperative society should be in existence for the preceding 3 years and, in the 
opinion of the district authority, based on an objective assessment of performance and 

===PAGE===

17 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
records, etc., should be well-reputed and dedicated to community/public good. 
(iii) The assistance will only be for community infrastructure and public utility building 
works (which are permissible for trusts/societies under Para 3.21). 
(iv) The structure constructed with MPLADS funds will be the property of the State/UT 
Government. (Para 3.21.1 of the Guidelines will be applicable mutatis mutandis) 
(v)	 The upper ceilings for assistance to trusts/societies (Rs.50 lakh to one particular trust/ 
society in its lifetime and Rs.1 crore to all trusts/societies by one MP in one year) will 
be applicable. (Para 3.21.2 of the Guidelines will be applicable mutatis mutandis) 
(vi) The recommending MP or any of his/her family members should not be an office-bearer 
or member or having patronage of the cooperative society.  Mutual funding by MPs 
will not be allowed. (Para 3.21.3 of the Guidelines will be applicable mutatis mutandis) 
(vii) The works (of infrastructure and public utility buildings) should be strictly non­
commercial in nature. 
(viii) The works should be for the community or public at large. Individual or family benefits 
will not be allowed (Item 11 of Annexure-II will be applicable). 
(ix) 	 Substitution of MPLADS funds for public and community contribution will not be 
allowed (Para 3.20 of the Guidelines will be applicable) 
(x)	 The works will be put to productive use. Their maintenance and operating costs will be 
the responsibility of the recipient cooperative society. 
(xi) Office and residential buildings of cooperative societies will not be allowed (that is 
residual Item 2 of Annexure-II will be applicable). 
3.43	 Installation of rainwater harvesting systems: Installation of rainwater harvesting systems 
(both for water storage and ground water recharging) in Government buildings and public 
places like schools, colleges, hospitals, community halls, water- bodies, etc. belonging to 
Central, State and Local Self Government will be permissible under the MPLADS. 

===PAGE===

18 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
4.	 FUND RELEASE AND MANAGEMENT 
4.1	 The annual entitlement of Rs 5 crore shall be released, in two equal instalments of Rs 2.5 
crore each, by Government of India directly to the District Authority of the Nodal District 
of the Member of Parliament concerned. 
4.2	 At the time of the constitution of Lok Sabha, and election of a Rajya Sabha Member, 
the first instalment of Rs. 2.5 crore shall be released to the District Authority without the 
documents stipulated  under para 4.3 below. The subsequent instalments of the continuing 
Members of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha will be released as per eligibility criteria indicated 
in Paragraph 4.3. 
4.3	 The first installment of Rs. 2.5 crore at the time of constitution of Lok Sabha or election of 
Rajya Sabha Member will be released in the beginning of the financial year. 
In the remaining years, the first installment will be released in the beginning of the financial 
year subject to the condition that the second installment of the previous year was released 
for the MP concerned and also subject to furnishing of the provisional Utilization Certificate 
of previous year covering at least 80% of the expenditure of the first installment of the 
previous year. 
The second installment of the MPLADS funds will be released subject to the fulfillment of 
the following eligibility criteria:­
(i) 	 the unsanctioned balance amount available in the account of the District Authority 
after taking into account the cost of all the work sanctioned is less than Rs.1 crore; 
(ii) the unspent balance of fund of the MP Concerned is less than Rs. 2.5 crore; and 
(iii) Utilization Certificate and Audit Certificate of the immediately concluded financial year 
ending 31st March have been furnished by District Authority (in format at Annexure- 
VIII & IX of the guidelines respectively. 
The above stipulations will be calculated from the Monthly Progress Report for each 
sitting and former MP term-wise separately. The Monthly Progress Report is to be sent 
by the District Authorities in the format at Annexure-VI. 
4.4 	 Funds Non-lapsable: Funds released to the District Authority by the Government of 
India are non-lapsable. Funds left in the district can be carried forward for utilization 
in the subsequent years. Further, the funds not released by the Government of India in 
a year will be carried forward for making releases in the subsequent years subject to the 
fulfillment of criteria stipulated in Paragraph 4.3. 

===PAGE===

19 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
4.5 The entitlement of funds of a Member of Parliament for a particular year is determined as 
under : 
Period in the financial year as MP Entitlement 
Less than 3 months Nil 
Up to 9 months 50% of the annual allocation 
More than 9 months 100% of the annual allocation 
Funds will be released to Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha MPs as per the eligibility criteria 
mentioned in para 4.3 above. However, in case of sudden death or resignation of an MP, 
the works which may have been duly recommended and duly sanctioned as per original 
eligibility, not anticipating the above contingency, would have to be completed (to avoid 
wastage of Government funds) irrespective of any reduced entitlement noted above due 
to death/resignation and the new incoming MP’s full entitlement would start afresh in 
accordance with the above formula. 
4.6	 If a Lok Sabha constituency is spread over more than one district, funds for the constituency 
shall be released to the opted Nodal District Authority, who will be responsible for transfer 
of funds to the other districts within the constituency as per the requirement of funds in 
those districts. 
4.7	 In respect of elected Members of Lok Sabha, the balances of MPLADS funds left by the 
predecessor MP in a Lok Sabha constituency (funds not committed works of the predecessor 
MP) would be passed on to the successor MP from that constituency. (In case of fresh 
delimitation, separate orders will be issued). 
4.8	 In respect of elected Members of Rajya Sabha, the balance of funds (funds not committed 
for the recommended works) left in the Nodal District by the predecessor Member in a 
particular State on his demitting office will be equally distributed by the State Government 
among the successor elected Rajya Sabha Members in that State. The unspent balance of 
even earlier elected Rajya Sabha MPs if not already distributed, will be equally distributed 
among the sitting Rajya Sabha Members of the States concerned by the State Government. 
4.9	 The balance of funds (funds not committed for the recommended and sanctioned works) left 
by the nominated Members of Rajya Sabha in the Nodal District will be equally distributed 
amongst the successor nominated Members of Rajya Sabha by the State Government with 
the approval of Government of India. 
4.10	 The balance of funds (funds not committed for the recommended and sanctioned works) 
left by Anglo-Indian nominated Lok Sabha MPs will be equally distributed among the 
successor Anglo-Indian nominated Lok Sabha MPs by the State Government with the 
approval of Government of India. 

===PAGE===

20 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
4.10.1 Completion of works/settling of accounts: The work of MPLADS shall be completed 
within 18 months from the date of demitting office in case of Rajya Sabha MPs or dissolution 
of the Lok Sabha. District Authorities shall settle and close the account of the concerned 
MP after completing all other formalities in another 3 months time, under intimation to the 
Govt. of India and with detailed information in the Monthly Progress Report (MPR). If the 
District Authority does not finish the projects within 18 months of demitting of an MP 
or dissolution of Lok Sabha, the District Authority will be required to complete the 
balance work out of State/District funds. In no case, any extension will be given and 
District Authority shall be held responsible in case of any lapse in this regard. 
4.11	 The unreleased fund by the Government of India will follow the pattern stipulated in 
clauses 4.7 to 4.10 as the case may be and the fund release will be done by the Government 
of India. 
4.12	 Generally a vacancy caused prematurely due to resignation, death, etc. of an elected/ 
nominated MP is filled up by election/nomination for the remaining term of the MP vacating 
the seat. The total term of both the MPs in such cases remains for the period of Lok Sabha 
and Rajya Sabha respectively. Therefore, the new MP will be treated as a successor of the 
MP vacating the seat prematurely and balance funds will not be distributed among other 
MPs but transferred to MPLADS Account of the successor MP. 
4.13	 The District Authority can sanction works up to the entitlement of the MP for that year 
without even physical availability of funds. Funds will be released by the Government as 
per the eligibility criteria stipulated in paragraphs 4.2, 4.3 and 4.5 above. 
4.14	 The District Authority shall maintain a separate bank account in nationalized bank for each 
MP for the purpose of MPLAD Scheme. The Bank account will not be changed without 
the approval of MoSPI. The details of the bank account shall be intimated to MoSPI for 
release of funds as per format at Annexure XII.  Physical and Financial Progress for each 
MP (sitting and former) will be sent by the District Authorities, separately as per Annexure 
VI every month (called MPR) which will also show the balance funds available with the 
Nodal Authority in the bank account. 
4.14.1 The Implementing Agencies shall also deposit the funds only in a nationalized bank. 
Separate account will be opened for each MP for the purpose. 
4.15	 Release of Funds to Implementing Agency: The District Authority shall release funds to the 
Implementing Agency in accordance with the State Government rules/guidelines applicable 
for the purpose. 
4.16	 The interest accrued on the funds released under the Scheme to the District Authority is to 
be used for permissible works recommended by the MP concerned. The interest accrued 

===PAGE===

21 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the funds released under the Scheme to the Implementing agencies shall be calculated 
while arriving at the savings for each work. The savings for each work shall be refunded 
to the District Authority within 30 days of the completion of the work. 
4.17	 Administrative Expenses: The existing contingency funds of 0.5% have been increased 
to 2% as Administrative Expenses, of the annual entitlement of MPLAD funds. The 2% of 
Administrative fund shall be part of annual entitlement of Rs. 5 crore of an MP and will 
be distributed among the Nodal District, Implementing District(s) and the State Nodal 
Department and is applicable from the financial year 2011-12. 
(I) 	 Administrative expenses constituting 2 per cent of the MPLADS fund shall be distributed 
in the following manner.  
On receipt of each installment of MPLADS funds, the nodal district authority shall 
immediately allocate and send to the State/UT Nodal Department 0.2 per cent of the 
amount for use by the State/UT nodal department. The balance amount will be retained by 
the nodal district for utilization as specified below.  
The nodal district will, on communicating any recommendation to an implementing district, 
transmit one per cent of the recommended amount towards administrative expenses to the 
relevant implementing administrative expenses as described in sub-section (II). 
(II) 	 The administrative expenses will be utilized by the nodal departments, nodal districts and 
implementing districts in the following way: 
(a) The nodal department can use the amount for their administrative expenses and for the 
following activities: 
1. Third party inspection-physical audit and quality check; 
2. Monitoring of works at State level; 
3. Translating and printing the MPLADS Guidelines in their respective regional 
language,  except in Hindi (Hindi version will be supplied by Government of India); 
4. Hiring of services/consultants for handling Data Entry, uploading of data on website, 
etc.; 
5. Creating awareness among public about the Scheme and dissemination of information 
of ongoing and completed works; 
6. Purchase of stationery; 

===PAGE===

22 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. Office equipment including computer hardware/software for MPLADS planning/ 
monitoring (excluding laptop); 
8. Telephone/fax/postal charges; and 
9. Expenses incurred to make MPLADS Works Monitoring Software and other 
MPLADS portal(s) operational. 
The State/UT nodal department will carry out third party inspection- physical audit and 
quality check of MPLAD works in their States in the following manner. 
In each district, a selection of MPLAD works will be taken up for inspection and physical 
audit as per the following criteria: 
(i) All works costing 25 lakh and more will be compulsorily covered; 
(ii) 50 per cent of all works costing 15 to 25 lakh must be covered. 	 For the remaining 
works, a sample of at least 50 works shall be drawn up involving the judicious balance 
of various parameters like cost, works in the area of SC/ST, M.P. wise work and works 
of societies and trust.  The nodal department will also monitor compliance of the district 
authorities in terms of the guidelines for the scheme; 
(iii) Petrol, Oil and Lubricant (POL) upto and not exceeding Rs. 50,000/- (Rs. fifty thousand 
only out of the Administrative expenses per year both to the nodal Districts and to the 
State/UT Nodal Departments) will be allowed to carry out inspections effectively. A 
separate bank account and office cash book for such expenditure incurred during a year 
under MPLAD Scheme, shall be maintained by the Nodal Department at State level, as 
also by the Nodal District and by the implementing district; 
All complaints received from MPs in the Ministry should also be required to be examined 
and report sent to MOSPI. 
(b) By the Nodal District, for executing the following activities: 
i)	 Hiring of services/consultants for handling Accounts, Data Entry, uploading of data 
on website, etc; 
ii) Creating 	awareness among public about the Scheme and  dissemination of 
information of ongoing and completed works; 
iii) 	Purchase of stationery; 
iv) 	Office equipment including computer hardware/software for MPLADS planning/ 
monitoring (excluding laptop); 

===PAGE===

23 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
v) Telephone/fax/postal charges; 
vi) Expenses incurred (a) to make MPLADS Works Monitoring 	  Software and other 
MPLADS portal(s) operational, (b) to get  the audit of the accounts done and obtain 
audit certificate, and 
vii) Outsourcing of technical estimates (if found necessary) in specialized cases. 
(c) By the Implementing Districts for executing the following activities: 
i)	 Creating awareness among public about the Scheme and dissemination of information 
of ongoing and completed works; 
ii) Purchase of stationery; 
iii) Office equipment including computer hardware/software for MPLADS planning/ 
monitoring (excluding laptop); 
iv) Telephone/fax/postal charges; 
v) 	 Hiring of services/consultants, for maintenance of accounts and monitoring of 
works; and 
vi) Outsourcing of technical estimates (if found necessary) in specialized cases.  
(III)	 A separate bank account for administrative funds will be opened in a Nationalized Bank as 
well as a separate cash book will be maintained for administrative expenditures incurred 
during the year by the Nodal Department at State level, as also by Nodal District and by the 
implementing district. 
For purpose of Utilization Certificate, the administrative expenses once distributed by 
Nodal District would be considered as spent and separate Utilization Certificate will not be 
necessary for these expenses. 
4.17.1 Centage Charges, etc: Excluding Administrative Expenses as provided for in para 4.17,        
the Nodal Department, District Authority or Implementing Agency shall not levy any 
expenses like supervision charges, centage charges, salary of personnel, travelling 
expenses, etc. in the implementation and supervision of works including preparatory works 
under the MPLADS. 

===PAGE===

24 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
   
 
    
   
 
5. ACCOUNTING PROCEDURE
 
5.1	 The District Authority and Implementing Agencies shall maintain accounts of MPLADS 
funds, MP-wise. Cash Book and other Books of Accounts shall be maintained as per the 
State/UT Government procedure. MPLADS funds received by the District Authority from 
the Government of India and the Implementing Agencies receiving the funds from the 
District Authority shall be kept only in Savings Bank Account of a nationalized Bank. IDBI 
may be treated at par with nationalized Banks. The selection of the Bank –Branch will be 
done by the District Authority, in accordance with the State/UT Government guidelines in 
this regards, if any, or (if State/UT Government guidelines are not available) in accordance 
with administrative requirement/ feasibility. Only one Account shall be maintained per MP. 
Deposit of MPLADS funds by the District Authority and Implementing Agencies in the 
State/UT Government Treasury accounts is prohibited. 
5.2 	 The District Authority shall also maintain different head wise list of works executed 
(Head and Code of Works may be seen in Annexure-IVE) in an Asset Register for all the 
MPLADS works created in the district and the Constituency for which the MPLADS funds 
were received. 
5.3	 On completion of a work, the Implementing Agency shall quickly finalize the accounts 
for that work and shall furnish a work completion report and utilization certificate and 
return the un-utilized balance (savings) and interest amount within 30 days to the District 
Authority concerned. The model work completion report is at Annexure-VII. The District 
Authority and the Implementing Agency would arrange to transfer the asset to the User 
Agency without any delay. The User Agency should take it on its books for normal operation 
and maintenance. 
Utilization and Audit Certificates 
5.4	 The District Authority and Implementing Agencies will properly maintain MPLADS 
accounts. District Authority will furnish Utilization Certificate every year in the form 
prescribed in the Guidelines (Annexure-VIII) to the State Government and the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation. These accounts and Utilization Certificates 
will be audited by the Chartered Accountants or the Local Fund Auditors or any Statutory 
Auditors as per the State/UT Government procedure. The Auditors should be engaged by 
State/UT Government for each District Authority on the basis of the recommendation of 
the Accountant General of the State/UT concerned. The District Authority will submit 
for every year the audited accounts, reports and certificates to the State Government and 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. The normal audit procedures 
would apply under the Scheme for auditing the accounts of the District Authority and 
Implementing Agencies. In addition, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India will 

===PAGE===

25 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
    
     
  
    
undertake test audit and send reports to the District Authorities, the State Government and 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
5.5	 The Audit Report should be prepared MP wise and should inter alia cover the following 
aspects: (i) number of Savings/other Bank Accounts being maintained by the District 
Administration and the Implementing Agencies; (ii) if any fund held in fixed deposits 
(Fixed deposits are not permissible); (iii) whether interest accrued in Savings Account has 
been taken as receipt and utilized for the Project; (iv) delay, if any, in crediting the Accounts 
of the District Authority and the Implementing Agencies by the receiving Bank - if so, the 
period of delay; (v) Whether Bank reconciliation in respect of Cash Book balance and Pass 
Book balance is being done every month; (vi) The Bank reconciliation should also cover 
interest accruals. The Bank reconciliation statement as on 31st March should be attached 
to the Audit Report; (vii) Proper maintenance of Cash Book by the District Authority and 
Implementing Agencies; (viii) Cheques issued but not encashed as on 31 st March as per 
Bank reconciliation; (ix) Actual expenditure incurred out of advances to the Implementing 
Agencies; and closing balances with them; (x) Diversion of funds, works prohibited and 
inadmissible items of expenditure (The details along with the views of District Authority 
in each case shall form part of the audit report for the District Authority to get such audit 
objection settled and follow up audit in succeeding year); and (xi) Utilization of earmarked 
fund for SC and ST areas. 
5.6	 The Audit Certificate furnished by the Chartered Accountants shall be submitted for every 
year by the District Authority along with replies to each of the audit objections on or 
before 30th September of the same calendar year. It will be the responsibility of the District 
Authority to ensure that all audit objections are settled forth with. The Implementing 
Agencies are to submit works completion report and associated fund utilization report to 
the District Authority. The Chartered Accountants will audit all such reports and records 
and furnish their certificate in a model Audit Certificate prescribed in these Guidelines 
(Annexure-IX). The audit fee may be paid under administrative expenses as per item II-b 
(vi) of paragraph 4.17. 
5.7	 There are former elected and nominated Members of Rajya Sabha and nominated Members 
of Lok Sabha who recommended works under MPLADS. Those are yet to be completed, 
for which works Completion Report, Utilization and Audit Certificate are to be furnished 
by the District Authorities along with Monthly Progress Report (Annexure-VI). 
5.8	 The District Authorities have been implementing MPLADS since 1993-94. They are 
to submit periodically works Completion Report, Utilization Certificate, and Audit 
Certificates. These Certificates are to be furnished to the Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation right from inception. 

===PAGE===

26 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 MONITORING 
6.1	 Deleted 
6.2 	 Role of the Central Government 
(i) 	 The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation shall monitor the overall 
position of funds released, cost of works sanctioned, funds spent etc. 
(ii) 	 The Ministry will monitor the receipt of Completion Reports, Utilization Certificates 
and Audit Certificate from the District Authorities. 
(iii) 	 The Ministry will bring out Annual Report on the implementation of MPLADS 
including the facts relating to physical and financial progress. 
(iv) 	 The Ministry will hold meetings in the States and also at the Centre at least once in a 
year to review the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme. 
(v) 	 The Ministry shall provide training materials for conducting training of district officers 
on MPLADS as and when these are organized by the State Governments. 
(vi)	 The Ministry will review the utilization of funds by the District Authorities in SC and 
ST areas. 
(vii) 	 The Ministry will review the audit objections and issues arising out of the Audit and 
Utilization Certificates. 
(viii) The Ministry will periodically review the physical and financial progress of MPLADS 
funds provided for rehabilitation of areas affected by natural calamities and take up 
the matter with the State Governments concerned for timely execution of MPLADS 
works. 
(ix) 	 The Ministry may undertake third party monitoring of the physical and financial 
progress of the rehabilitation works in the areas affected by natural calamities. 
6.3 	 Role of the State/UT Government 
(i)	 The Nodal Department will be responsible for coordination with the Ministry and 
proper and effective supervision of the MPLADS implementation in the State. The 
State Government will assign coordination and monitoring of MPLADS work to a 
department/dedicated cell under a senior officer who is hierarchically senior in rank to 
the district authorities described earlier in the guidelines. To this effect a committee 
under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner/Additional 
Chief Secretary should review MPLADS implementation progress with the District 

===PAGE===

27 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
   
      
  
     
   
 
 
Authorities and MPs at least once in a year. The Nodal Department Secretary and other 
Administrative Department Secretaries should also participate in such meetings. State/ 
UT Government should furnish the minutes of the State/District Monitoring Committee 
meetings to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
(ii) 	 The States/UTs in which Divisional Commissioner arrangements exist, the Divisional 
Commissioners should be empowered to review the MPLADS implementation progress 
and guide the District Authorities. 
(iii) The State/UT Government will review (a) the utilization of funds by the District 
Authority in SC and ST areas; and (b) the audit objections and issues arising out of the 
audit and utilization certificates. 
(iv) The State/UT Government, by specific order, shall empower the District Authorities and 
other District functionaries technical and administrative powers for implementation of 
MPLADS. 
(v) 	 The State/UT Government may make arrangements for training of district officers 
concerned with the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme. 
(vi) 	 The State/UT Government may authorize its officers not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary/Executive Engineer to inspect MPLADS works as and when they make 
official field visits. It may also check and review the number of MPLADS works 
inspected by the District Authorities. The District Authority shall mandatorily 
maintain inspection registers–one for details of inspections of works carried out by 
trusts/societies  under para 3.21 and the second for showing details of works given to 
other implementing agencies, including NGOs as implementing agencies State Nodal 
Officials should inspect a minimum of 1% of the MPLADS works in District every 
year and an inspection register should be maintained at the State Level and follow up 
action should also be taken on the findings during those inspection. 
(vii) 	 The State/UT Government shall, out of the panel of auditors approved with Accountant 
General of the State/UT, engage an Auditor for auditing of  MPLADS accounts of each 
District Authority. For purpose of continuity, the same auditor may (if the State desires) 
continue for three years and any fresh appointments should be made by January of a 
calendar year for the succeeding three financial years. 
(viii) 	 The State/UT Government shall hoist data on MPLADS implementation in the state on 
their web sites. 
(ix) 	 The State/UT Government shall distribute the unspent balance of  Rajya Sabha MPs as 
stipulated in paragraph 4.8. 

===PAGE===

28 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(x)	 The Nodal Department in the States should coordinate with the District Authorities for 
timely submission of Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates. Wherever, there is 
a delay in submission of these documents, the Nodal Department should take up the 
matter with the District Authorities and ensure timely submission of these documents 
to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. 
(xi)	 The State-level monitoring Committee shall specifically review the physical and 
financial progress of MPLADS funds provided for execution of rehabilitation works in 
the areas affected by natural calamities. 
6.4 	 Role of the District Authority: The District Authority’s role has been outlined in different 
paragraphs of the Guidelines. Here the District Authority’s role on coordination and 
supervision is being indicated. 
(i) 	 The District Authority would be responsible for overall coordination and supervision 
of the works under the scheme at the district level and inspect at least 10% of the works 
under implementation every year. The District Authority should involve the MPs in 
the inspections of projects to the extent feasible. 
(ii) 	 The District Authority shall enforce the provisions made in the Paragraph 2.5 on the 
earmarked 15% and 7.5 % of funding for MPLADS works in the SC and ST areas 
respectively. 
(iii) The District Authority shall maintain the work-registers indicating the position of each 
work recommended by the MPs and shall furnish work details along with a photograph 
of each work costing Rs.5 lakh or more, to the Ministry in the prescribed format and 
hoist the same on MPLAD Website. 
(iv)	 The District Authority shall also maintain a register of all the assets created with the 
Scheme funds and subsequently transferred to the User Agencies. 
(v) 	 The District Authority will inspect all works executed by/for societies and trusts under 
MPLADS and ensure that the conditions as per the agreement are being complied 
with. In case of violation of any of the provisions of the agreement, action as per the 
agreement shall be taken by the District Authority. 
(vi) 	 The District Authority shall review, every month and in any case at least once in 
every quarter, MPLADS works implementation with the Implementing Agencies. 
The District Authority shall invite the MPs concerned to such review meetings and 
send a report of such a review meetings to Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
(vii) The District Authority shall be responsible to settle audit objections raised in the Audits 
Reports. 

===PAGE===

29 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
(viii) The Nodal District Authority shall submit Monthly Progress Report to the Government 
of India, State/UT Government and the MP concerned for each MP separately in the 
format available at Annexure-VI on or before 10th of the succeeding month. With regard 
to the execution of works in the SC and ST areas, physical and financial details shall be 
furnished in part IV and V of format available at Annexure-VI. 
(ix) 	 As per paragraph 4.8, the Nodal District Authority shall report to the State/UT 
Government about the unspent balance of the elected Rajya Sabha MP concerned. He 
shall also report to the Government of India the details as per paragraphs 4.9 and 4.10. 
(x) 	 The Nodal Department in the State shall monitor the MPLADS funds contributed 
by MPs to ensure that the funds are utilized in time by the district authorities for 
execution of rehabilitation works. The Nodal Department shall also ensure submission 
of Monthly Progress Reports specifically on utilization of MPLADS funds for carrying 
out rehabilitation works in the natural calamity affected districts. 
6.5 Role of the Implementing Agencies 
(i) 	 It will be the responsibility of the officers of the Implementing Agencies to regularly 
visit the works spots to ensure that the works are progressing satisfactorily as per the 
prescribed procedure and specifications and the time schedule. 
(ii) 	 The Implementing Agencies shall furnish physical and financial progress of each work 
to the District Authority every month with a copy to the concerned State Department. 
The Implementing Agencies should provide the report also in the soft format. A work 
register should also be maintained by the implementing agencies showing details of the 
physical and financial progress of projects being undertaken by them. This register 
should also contain the details of spot visit made by the implementing agencies. 
Implementing Agency must inspect 100% of the works. 
(iii) 	 The Implementing Agencies shall furnish completion report/certificates and utilization 
certificates to the District Authority within one month of completion of the works. 
(iv) The Implementing Agencies shall also refund to the District Authority the savings 
(balance amounts) including interest if any, at their disposal within one month. 

===PAGE===

30 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
  
  
7.	 APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES 
7.1	 The Guidelines will come into force with immediate effect. These Guidelines on MPLADS 
super cede the extant Guidelines and instructions issued there under. 
7.2	 Clarification, if any, on the Guidelines on the MPLADS or interpretation of any provision 
of these Guidelines shall be referred to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation and its decision shall be the final. 

===PAGE===

31 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
  
    
                        
    
             
  
 
 
          
      
      
 
--------------------              ---------------------
--------------------------------------------     -------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------     -------------------------------------------
Annexure-I 
FORM FOR CHOICE OF NODAL DISTRICT 
(For all Members of Parliament) 
I am elected/nominated Member of Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha with effect from ……………… 
(date, month, year). My Choice of the Nodal District for implementation and release of 
MPLADS funds is: 
District Opted : _________________________________ 
District Address : _________________________________
 _________________________________
 _________________________________ 
PIN: 
State/UT in which the district falls :________________________ 
(SIGNATURE)
Full Name:
 
(In capital Letters)
Date:
 
Permanent Address Delhi Address 
PIN: PIN: 
Telephone with STD……………. Telephone………………………….. 
Fax……………………………….. E mail………………………………. 
(Any change in the addresses in future may also be intimated immediately) 
To,
 
Director (MPLADS),
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation,
Government of India,
 
Sardar Patel Bhawan, Parliament Street,
 
New Delhi 110001.
 
Copy to Shri/Smt………………………… Secretary, ………………….Nodal Department, 
State Government..…...........................
 
Copy to Shri/Smt……………………District Authority (District Collector).…................…… 
District, At…………………. P.O ………………………………. PIN…………………………
 

===PAGE===

32 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
LIST OF WORKS PROHIBITED UNDER MPLADS 
1. 	 Office and residential buildings belonging to Central and State Governments, their 
Departments, Government Agencies/Organizations and Public Sector Undertakings. 
However, construction of Railway Halt Station, subject to provision of para 3.35 will be 
permissible. 
2. 	 Office and residential buildings and other works belonging to private and commercial 
organizations. 
3. 	 All works involving commercial establishments/units. 
4. 	 All maintenance works of any type. However, re-boring of hand pumps, subject to provision 
of para 3.32 will be permissible. 
5. 	 All renovation and repair works. (However, works of retrofitting of essential lifeline 
buildings, viz Govt. hospitals, Govt. Schools and public buildings to be used as shelters 
in an emergency and heritage and archaeological monuments and buildings with specific 
permission available from the Archaeological Survey of India will be permitted under 
MPLADS). 
6. 	 Grants and loans, contribution to any Central and State/UT Relief Funds. 
7. 	 Naming of assets after any person. 
8. 	 Project of movable items except as those provided in Annexure-IIA. 
9. 	 Acquisition of land or any compensation for land acquired. 
10. 	 Reimbursement of any type of completed or partly completed works or items. 
11. 	 Assets for individual/family benefits. (However, as per para 3.28 of the guidelines, tri-
cycle (including motorized), artificial limbs and battery operated motorized wheelchair to 
differently abled deserving persons are permitted). MPs may also provide MPLADS funds 
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes providing assets for individual/family use, with the proviso 
that the M.P. will not add or change the priority list or any of the criteria for selection 
declared in the centrally sponsored scheme. He may not nominate specific individuals as 
beneficiaries, but can nominate the geographical area where these MPLADS funds would be 
spent. 
12. 	 All revenue and recurring expenditure. 

===PAGE===

33 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
13. 	 Works within the places of religious worship and on land belonging to or owned by religious 
faith/group. (However, construction of crematoriums and structures on burial/cremation 
grounds irrespective of religious faith can be taken up under the MPLADS regardless of the 
location being adjacent to or falling within the area under the places of religious worship). 
14.	 Deleted. 
15.	 Construction of Swagat Dwars. 
16.	 Execution of works in unauthorized colonies. 

===PAGE===

34 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-IIA 
List of (i) special items of works and (ii) works of non durable nature 
permissible under the MPLADS Guidelines 
1.	 Convergence of Member of Parliament Local Area Development (MPLADS) with 
MGNREGA (Para 3.17.1): Funds from Member of Parliament Local Area Development 
Scheme (MPLADS) can be converged with MGNREGA with the objective of creating 
more durable assets. MPs may recommend under MPLADS works from out of the shelf of 
MGNREGA projects approved by the Zilla Panchayat for the year when recommendation 
is being made and should have been sanctioned by the District Programme Coordinator 
which constitutes the approved Annual Work Plan under MGNREGA of the district. As 
far as possible, the MPLADS Funds shall be used in respect of material component only. 
1.1.	 Once a work is recommended for MGNREGA, MPs will not be authorized to withdraw 
the same. In case of request of withdrawal of MPLADS Funds, NOC from MGNREGA 
would be required. The guidelines of MGNREGA including all non-negotiables, such 
as, no contractors, no use of machinery, social audit, etc. shall be strictly followed. The 
Gram Panchayat shall be nominated as the Implementing Agency by the District Planning 
Committee (DPC) for the convergence works under MPLADS. The DPC shall provide 
adequate technical support to the Gram Panchayat to implement the works.  Since the 
material and labour components are expected to flow simultaneously, it will not be necessary 
in these convergence cases for MPLADS Funds to be used only at the end. 
1.2.	 The accounts of Expenditure will be strictly maintained separately for both MPLADS and 
MGNREGA. A joint plaque (stone/metal) indicating the cost involved, contribution from 
MPLADS/ MGNREGA, commencement, completion and inauguration and the name of 
the MP sponsoring the work under MPLAD Scheme/MGNREGA should be permanently 
erected. 
2.	 Convergence of Member of Parliament Local Area Development (MPLADS) with 
Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports of the Ministry of 
Youth Affairs and Sports. (para 3.17.2): Funds from Member of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme (MPLADS) can be converged with Khelo India: National Programme 
for Development of Sports with the objective of creating more durable assets. MPs may 
recommend under MPLADS, works such as Development of playfields under Khelo India: 
National Programme for Development of Sports including leveling of playgrounds in hilly 
areas, construction of boundary wall, etc. in villages and blocks from out of the shelf of 
Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports projects if otherwise eligible 
under MPLAD Scheme. Similarly, in the urban areas, convergence will also be permissible 
for creation of durable sports assets such as multi-purpose sports halls, athletic tracks, 
football, hockey turf, etc. as per the provisions of guidelines on MPLADS. This will be 
subject to the provision of the Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports 
for creation of urban sports infrastructure. 

===PAGE===

35 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1.	 The accounts of Expenditure will be strictly maintained separately for both MPLADS 
and Khelo India: National Programme for Development of Sports. A joint plaque (stone/ 
metal) indicating the cost involved, contribution from MPLADS/Khelo India: National 
Programme for Development of Sports commencement, completion and inauguration and 
the name of the MP sponsoring the work under MPLAD Scheme/Khelo India: National 
Programme for Development of Sports should be permanently erected. 
3.	 Utilisation of MPLADS Fund for welfare of the differently abled persons (para 3.28 ): MPs may 
recommend upto a maximum of Rs.10 lakhs per year OR the consolidated entitled amount 
of their balance tenure, effective from the financial year 2011-12, at any time from their 
MPLADS fund for giving assistance to the physically challenged. Such assistance will be 
given only for the purchase of tricycles (manual/battery operated/ motorized), motorized/ 
battery operated wheelchair and artificial limbs for differently abled deserving persons. All 
applications for such assistance shall be examined and approved by a Committee under the 
Chief Medical Officer of the District to ensure proper eligibility. The District Authority will 
be fully involved in the selection of such eligible persons. The Committee will also certify 
the reasonability of the rate.  No recurring expenses will be admissible .No cash grant will 
be permissible, but the item would be obtained and given to the deserving differently abled 
person in a public function. 
4.	 Purchase of computers (para 3.30): Purchase of computers is permissible for Government 
and Government aided educational institutions. MS-office Software (Standard Edition with 
Microsoft Licence Agreement) with media which comprises MS-Word, MS-Excel, MS-
Power Point, MS-Access, MS-Outlook as per DGS&D rate contracts is also permissible. 
Imparting of training on these software (Window Operating System and MS-Office) to two 
teachers per school in also permissible. The training may comprise 24-48 working hours 
of learning period which may be spilt over a period ranging from one week to 2 weeks to 
provide flexibility in learning. The training shall be imparted by an authorized agency at 
the district level with approved rates (approved and accepted by District Authority). 
5.	 Purchase of Mobile Library for Educational Institute belonging to Central, State, UTs and 
Local Self - Government subject to provision of para 3.31. 
6.	 Purchase of vehicles, including school buses/vans, earth movers, and equipments meant for 
hospitals, educational, sports, drinking water and sanitation purposes belonging to Central, 
State, UT and Local Self Governments. 
6.1.	 Whenever a Member of Parliament recommends a new proposal for capital works for 
construction of Government Hospitals and Educational Institutions, he may recommend 
purchase of movable items (like furniture, equipment and not consumables). The proposal 
should essentially be for capital works and the allied expenditure on movable items 
(furniture, equipment etc.) should not be more than 10% of the total cost. 

===PAGE===

36 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations for purchase of movable items such as furniture, equipment, etc. cannot 
be made for the existing Government Hospital and Educational Institutions except for 
primary and secondary schools belonging to Central/State/UT Governments and Local 
Bodies and to Government-aided schools. 
Furniture up to Rs.50 lakh in a year can be recommended by an MP from MPLADS 
funds for primary and secondary schools belonging to Central/State/UT Governments and 
Local Bodies and to Government-aided schools.  One particular school will be eligible to 
maximum Rs.10 lakh in its life time. 
It will be mandatory to emboss the furniture provided under MPLADS with the name of 
the school, the year of procurement and serial number.  The procurement shall be made 
as per the applicable State Government rules and procedures. The concerned district-level 
officer of the State Education Department shall check and certify the quantity, quality and 
appropriateness of cost of the furniture and make available his certification to the District 
Authority. 
The furniture so procured shall be duly entered in the stock register of the school by the 
Principal/Headmaster. The maintenance of the furniture shall be responsibility of the 
concerned school. 
7.	 Works of retrofitting of essential lifeline buildings, viz Govt. hospitals, Govt. Schools 
and public buildings to be used as shelters in an emergency, heritage and archeological 
monuments and buildings with specific permission available from the Archeological 
Survey of India. 
8.	 Utilization of MPLADS funds to Centrally Sponsored Scheme providing assets for 
individual or family use with the proviso that the M.P. will not add or change any of the 
criteria for selection declared in the centrally sponsored scheme. 
9.	 Creation of a Facilitation Centre at each District (para 3.34): An MP would be entitled 
for setting up of MPLADS Facilitation Centre in the Nodal District for which space/room 
would be provided by the DC/DM in the premises of either the DRDA or the CDO Office/ 
CEO, District Panchayat Office. 
9.1	 The main function of this facilitation centre would be to provide to the Hon’ble M.Ps all 
the information at one place relevant for the effective implementation of the scheme. If a 
District has been opted by more than one MP, the Facilitation Centre will provide service 
to all these Members of Parliament. This facilitation centre should work under the direct 
control of the District Authority and should have persons on contract with adequate computer 
operating knowledge to manage the Centre. A lone Data Entry Operator, if necessary, may 
be engaged through outsourcing/contract from within the 2% Administrative charges. If 
a Data Entry Operator is engaged, the engagement shall be strictly casual (outsourced/ 
contractual), it shall not be against any post and shall not, in any form, be construed as 

===PAGE===

37 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
government employment. That no liability, administrative or legal or financial, accrues 
on the Government (State or Central) in future shall be the responsibility of the District 
Authority that makes the engagement. 
9.2	 This facilitation centre should have computer with internet facility and other related facilities. 
The persons managing the facilitation centre should ensure that all the information about 
the on-going MPLADS works in the district, information on all the completed works, up to 
date financial information and up to date MPLADS guidelines and circulars are available 
in the facilitation centre. Apart from this, the facilitation centre should also display details 
of on- going MPLADS works and should also maintain details of shelf of projects. 
The information provided through the facilitation centres inter alia include the following: 
(i) 	Details of works: 
(a) recommended by the MP 
(b) pending examination 
(c) found ineligible and rejected 
(d) sanctioned 
(e) pending sanction, with reasons therefore. 
(ii) Details of works under implementation, including their physical and financial progress. 
(iii) Details of completed works, including total expenditure incurred thereon. 
(iv) Latest Monthly Progress Report.
 
In addition, the facilitation centres should also maintain the following:
 
•		 Guidelines of MPLADS 
•		 Circulars issued from time to time by Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. 
•		 Indicative and illustrative Shelf of Projects. 
9.3	 The facilitation centre should have theirown e-mail address. If required, the District Authority 
should take the assistance of the District NIC cell in establishing such a facilitation centre. 
Further District Authority should ensure that the persons engaged on contract for managing 
the facilitation centre should be well behaved and courteous. 
9.4	 The recurring running expenses will be booked under 2% administrative charges, of which 
the Nodal Districts gets 0.8%. 
10.	 Ambulances/Hearse Vans (Para 3.25): 
a)	 Ambulances are already allowed to be purchased by the District Authorities/District 
Chief Medical Officer of the District on the recommendation of a Member of 
Parliament. 

===PAGE===

38 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
b)	 The Ambulances/Hearse Vans will be purchased on the recommendation of the 
Member of Parliament and after examination by a three-membered Committee 
consisting of District Magistrate/District Collector as Chairman and District Chief 
Medical Officer & one representative of District Magistrate/District Collector as 
Members. 
c)	 The ownership of the Ambulance/Hearse Vans purchased will rest with the District 
Authority/District Chief Medical Officer and will be under the general supervision 
of the District Chief Medical Officer. 
d)	 User charges will be fixed by the District Authority (on the recommendation of 
an appropriately formed Committee) who would be responsible to ensure that the 
charges so fixed are reasonable and affordable for the common man. 
e)	 The District Collector District Magistrate will monitor the services provided by 
these Ambulances/Hearses vans, to ensure maximum benefit to the public. 
f)	 Each Ambulance/Hearse Vans so purchased will have bold markings on both sides, 
stating: “Ambulance/Hearse Vans purchased with Government of India, MPLADS 
funds, contributed by …………….MP.” 
g)	 The District Authority will put up public notices at prominent places in the 
Government Hospitals, Municipal/Panchayat Offices, etc., together with the 
contact numbers, about the provision of Ambulance/Hearse Vans by the Member of 
Parliament from his/her MPLADS funds to enable the public to avail the services 
of the Ambulance/Hearse Vans and to lodge complaints in the cases of misuse or 
non-use so as to enable the District Authority to take necessary action after proper 
enquiry into those complaints. 
10.1	 Purchase of Ambulances for sick/injured animals in Wildlife Sanctuaries and National 
Parks - Vehicles to Transport Animals (Para 3.25.1) 
It is allowed to procure vehicles to transport animals (sick/injured or otherwise) in the 
Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Parks with the following provisions: 
a)	 The vehicles will be purchased on the recommendation of a three members committee 
consisting of District Magistrate/District Collector as Chairman and concerned 
District Forest Officer (DFO) and representative of Director/Head of the concerned 
Wildlife Sanctuary/National Park as Members. 
b) 	 The ownership of the vehicle so purchased will vest with the Wildlife Sanctuaries/ 
National Park concerned and the vehicle will be under the general supervision of the 
Director/Head of the Wildlife Sanctuary/National Park concerned. 
c) 	 The vehicle so purchased will have bold markings on both sides, stating: ‘vehicle 
for transporting animals’, purchased with Government of India, MPLADS Funds, 
contributed by Shri ……………………….MP’. 

===PAGE===

39 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
10.2 Ambulances to transport animals (para 3.25.2): 
(a) Ambulances are already allowed to be purchased by the District Authorities on the 
recommendation of a Member of Parliament for sick/injured animals in Wildlife 
Sanctuaries and National Parks.  It has been decided to also allow the purchase of 
ambulances to transport sick/injured animals in the District. 
The ambulances will be purchased on the recommendation of the Member of 
Parliament and after examination by a three- member Committee consisting of 
District Magistrate/District Collector as Chairman and District Chief Medical 
Officer and concerned District Chief Veterinary Officer as Members. 
(b) The ownership of the ambulance purchased will rest with the District Authority/ 
District Chief Veterinary Officer. 
(c) User charges will be fixed by the District Authority (on the recommendation of 
an appropriately formed Committee) who would be responsible to ensure that the 
charges so fixed are reasonable and affordable for the common man. 
(d) The District Collector/Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate will monitor the 
services provided by these ambulances, to ensure maximum benefit to the public. 
(e) The ambulance so purchased will have bold markings on both sides, stating: 
“Ambulance for transporting animals, purchased with Government of India, 
MPLADS funds, contributed by ........................MP”. 
(f)	 The District Authority will put up public notices at prominent places in the 
Government Veterinary Hospitals, Municipal/Panchayat Offices, etc., together with 
contact numbers, about the provision of ambulance by the Member of Parliament 
from his/her MPLAD Scheme funds to enable the public to avail the services of 
the ambulance and to lodge complaints in the cases of misuse or non-use so as to 
enable the District Authority to take necessary action after proper enquiry into those 
complaints. 
11.	 Purchase of books for schools, colleges and public library(Para 3.29): Books to the 
extent of Rs. 22 lakh per annum can be purchased for schools, colleges and public libraries 
belonging to Central, States, UTs and Local Self-Government from MPLADS Fund. The 
ceiling of purchases is as follows: 
i) Purchase of books for schools upto middle level  - Upto Rs.6 Lakh 
ii) Purchase of books for schools upto high school/	  - Upto Rs.8 Lakh
 
Higher secondary level
 
iii) Purchase of books for colleges/other technical	  - Upto Rs.8 Lakh
 
institutes/ITIs/Public Libraries
 

===PAGE===

40 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
While recommending purchase of books to schools, colleges and other technical institutes 
etc., the following monetary ceiling shall be adhered to  for a particular school/college/ 
other technical institutions/ITI’s/Libraries:- 
i) Upto Middle School Level	 - Rs. 10,000/­
ii) Upto High School/Higher Secondary Level - Rs. 25,000/­
iii) For colleges/other technical institutes/ITIs	 - Rs. 50,000/­
/Public Libraries
 
These Schools/Colleges/Institutes will not be entitled for recommendation of books in the 
subsequent year but will be entitled in the 3rd year again. 
The recommendations made by the Hon’ble MPs shall be examined/ approved by a 
Committee consisting of:­
i)	 District Education Officer - Chairman 
ii)	 A representative of District Magistrate/District Collector; 
iii) Two Principals/Head Masters; and 
iv) Co-opt Head Master/Principal of the School/college /institution to whom the books are 
proposed to be supplied. 
12.	 New borings in place of hand pumps installed under MPLAD Scheme (para 3.32): New 
borings in lieu of the existing non-functional hand-pumps using the re-usable components 
of the parts of the non-functional hand pumps are permissible subject to the following 
conditions:­
1. 	 New borings may be allowed subject to techno-economic feasibility and as per laid-
down procedures of the State/UT concerned. 
2. All usable components/parts of the defunct hand pumps must be used in the new borings. 
3. New borings should be only for water required for drinking and household purposes and 
in no circumstances should water be diverted for any other purpose such as agricultural, 
industrial, commercial, horticultural etc. 
4. New borings may be allowed only in need-based cases and not as a matter of routine 
and it should in no case be detrimental to the water table. 
5.	 The proposals for new borings should satisfy all other conditions stipulated in the 
Guidelines on MPLADS 
13.	 Construction of Railway Halt Station (Para 3.35): Funds from MPLAD Scheme if so 
nominated by MP can be used for construction of Railway Halt Station to facilitate the local 
community for boarding/deboarding from the train. The implementation will be carried out 
as per the provisions of the Railways, subject to the provisions of the MPLADS Guidelines. 

===PAGE===

41 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
    
   
   
        
 
13.1	 If Railways are also contributing for such activities, the accounts of expenditure will 
be strictly maintained separately for both MPLADS and Railways and a strict check be 
maintained to avoid any duplication/duplicate accounting. A plaque (steel/metal) indicating 
the cost involved, contribution made from MPLADS/Railways, if any, commencement, 
completion and inauguration and the name of the MP sponsoring the work should be 
permanently erected. 
14.	 Assistance to Bar Associations (Para 3.38): MPs may recommend their MPLADS funds 
to the Bar Associations at the Tehsil/Sub-division/District level for construction of Building 
of the Bar Association provided the land for it belongs to the Central, State/UT or local 
self-Government and subject to the provisions of para 3.21 of the MPLADS Guidelines. No 
MPLADS Funds will be permissible for any recurring expenditure of the Bar Association. 
14.1	 Assistance to Bar Association Library for purchase of books (Para 3.38.1): Subject 
to provisions of para 3.38  above and para 3.21 of the MPLADS Guidelines, MPs may 
recommend MPLADS funds to Bar Association Library for purchase of books upto Rs. 
50,000/- (Rs. fifty thousand only) per annum for Lower and District Courts (courts at Tehsil/ 
Sub-division/District level). 
The recommendations of the MPs under paras 3.38 and 3.38.1 will be examined/approved 
by a Committee consisting of : 
-	 District Commissioner/District Magistrate 
of the respective District Chairman 
-	 Public prosecutor nominated by 
District/Session Judge  Member
 
-	 Registrar of the respective court  Member 
-	 Two eminent Lawyers/Advocates Member
 
nominated by the Bar Council
 
Since, presently, under para 3.21 of the MPLADS Guidelines community infrastructure 
and public utility building works are only permissible for registered societies/trusts and 
books are not covered therein, para 3.38.1 is in modification of contents in para 3.21. 
15.	 Provision of Solar Light: While beneficiary contribution for individual solar lights will 
continue to be prohibited under MPLADS, the net cost after deduction of subsidy, which 
a government or local body/agency has to bear for a solar light project, where the project 
is in a public place, where the project is for the public/community at large, and where the 
subsequent maintenance of the solar lights is duly provided for, will be permitted under 
MPLADS. The same is for public good and in public interest and promotes solar energy 
and the aspect of individual/family benefit does not arise in such cases. 
It may be noted that the above does not imply any dilution in the provisions contained in 
item 11 of Annexure-II and in para 3.20.  

===PAGE===

42 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
     
16. Installation of firmly fixed waiting chairs/benches for passengers at railway stations: 
Funds from MPLAD Scheme can be used for installation of firmly fixed waiting chairs/ 
benches (including overhead sheds) for passengers at railway stations. These will be 
the property of Ministry of Railways, duly taken on its inventory. The implementation 
will be carried out as per the provison under Para 2.11(b) which states that for certain 
works in certain Central Government Ministries/Organizations (like Railways) where the 
Implementing Agency has necessarily to be concerned Central Government Ministry/ 
Organization, the same shall be selected as the Implementing Agency. 
17. Construction of toilets in schools: 
The District Authorities have been requested as below: 
i.	 that whenever any infrastructure for schools/educational institutions is recommended 
under MPLADS, it should be ensured that the proposal invariably contains the requisite 
number of toilets; 
ii. in case of co-educational schools/educational institutions, there should be separate 
toilets for girls; 
iii. infrastructure for schools/educational institutions should be sanctioned under MPLADS 
only and only after ensuring the availability of requisite  number of toilets in that school/ 
educational institution. 
iv. further, the use of bio-digester toilets should also be adopted, wherever feasible and 
appropriate; 
v.	 in addition, list of schools without toilets, as well as a list of co-educational schools 
without separate toilets for girls, may be prepared and made available immediately to 
the Hon’ble MPs for their reference and use. 
18. Shelters for imparting training for skill development: 
Shelters for imparting training for skill development will be permissible in line with the 
basic scheme of the MPLADS, with the stipulations that: 
(i) They will be admissible only for: 
(a) government/government institutions (as per the general import of  MPLADS); and 
(b) registered trusts/societies (as per para 3.21 of the Guidelines on MPLADS). 
(ii) In both cases: 
(a)	 commercial activity will be prohibited; 
(b)	 only such shelters will be permitted as are suitably and specifically designed for the 
purpose of imparting specialized skill training. 

===PAGE===

43 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
(c) the shelters may also be such as can be dismantled, transported and firmly re-erected 
and re-used at another spot. 
(d) the shelters created under the MPLADS will be duly entered in the 	  stock-register of 
the recipient government institution or registered trust/society eligible under para 3.21 
of the Guidelines of MPLADS. 
(e) the implementation will be undertaken by the District Authority as per the State 
Government rules, guidelines and procedures. 
19.	 In future it will be mandatory that the durable assets created under the MPLADS are 
friendly to persons with disabilities, wherever feasible. Retrofitting in existing durable 
assets created under the MPLADS to make them friendly to persons with disabilities will 
also be permissible. 
It has also been decided that in future all movable assets specifically permissible under 
the Guidelines on MPLADS such as school buses, ambulances, mobile dispensaries, etc. 
procured with MPLADS funds are friendly to persons with disabilities, wherever feasible. 
20.	 MPs may recommend funds for augmentation of funds for Schemes such as ‘Swachh 
Bharat Abhiyan’ which provide for construction of individual toilets, subject to provisions 
contained in para 3.17 and 3.18 of the Guidelines on MPLADS. 

===PAGE===

44 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
                                 
          
 
 
 
 
  
Annexure-III 
FORMAT FOR RECOMMENDING ELIGIBLE WORKS BY
 
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
 
(The recommendation may be given on the MP’s letter head) 
Place: ____________________ 
Date: ____________________ 
From 
Name 
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha) 
Address 
To 
The District Authority 
(District Collector/Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/ 
Commissioner of Municipal Corporation/CEO of District Planning Committee) 
Subject: Recommendation of works under MPLAD Scheme 
Sir, 
I recommend that the following works may please be scrutinized and sanctioned, in 
the order of priority indicated below, from the MPLADS fund. The works in the Priority 
No…………………….…………..are meant for the development of areas inhabited by SCs /and 
STs Population respectively. 
Priority 
No. 
Nature of work 
(Sector name & work code)* Location Approximate cost (Rs. 
in lakh) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
* Please refer to Annex – IVE of the Guideline
 (The priority list can be increased if the MP recommends more works up to the entitlement). 
2. The above works may please be got scrutinized and technical, financial and administrative 
sanction issued within 75 days of receipt of this letter. The sanctioned works should be completed 
quickly as per the provisions of the MPLADS Guidelines. I may please be kept informed of the 
sanction and the progress of the works implementation. If any of the recommended work is found 
ineligible/rejected, reasons for the same may be intimated to me within 45 days.  If the sanction is 
delayed beyond 75 days, reasons for the same may also be intimated to me. 
Yours faithfully, 
(Signature of MP) 

===PAGE===

45 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
      
    
        
              
       
     
      
 
 
 
    
     
       
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
Annexure-IV A 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
Input Format for the District Authority 
State: Implementing District: 
Whether LS/RS: Nodal District: 
Constituency: if LS MP: Report for 
(MM/YYYY) 
Block/Urban: Ward/Gram Panchayat 
1.	 Work Identity No. 
2.	 Work with Location 
3.	 Sector 
4.	 Scheme 
5.	 No. of SC and ST population covered (SC) (ST) (Total) 
by this work 
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
6. (a) Date of Receipt of Proposal 
(b) Priority No. of Proposal as 
recommend by MP
 
(c) Date of Sanction 
(d) Date of Work Commencement 
7.	 Work Cost Sanctioned (Rs). 
8.	 Implementing Agency 

===PAGE===

46 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
9.	 Date of Completion
(a) Original (as indicated on sanction order) 
(b) Anticipated (Actual if Completed) 
10.	 Cumulative Expenditure(Rs.) 
11.	 Present Status
 (N-Not yet started, O-On going, C-Completed, 
D- Discontinued) 
12.	 Physical Progress (%) 
13. 	 Cumulative Amount Released (Rs.)
14. 	 Date of last Release of Payment 
15.	  If Completed, Amount of Saving (Rs.)
16. 	 Date of Refund of Saving 
17.	 If Completed, Date of handing over to the 
User Agency 
18. 	 If Completed, Date of submission of Completion 
Report by Implementing Agency 
19.	 REMARKS IF ANY 
This space may be used to mention reasons for 
(dd) (mm) 
(dd) (mm) 
(dd) (mm) 
(yyyy) 
(yyyy) 
(yyyy) 
Discontinued Projects/Delay in execution/Non Completion, or any other remarks and steps 
taken for revival/early commencement and completion of the work. 

===PAGE===

47 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
      
    
         
   
     
 
 
 
 
 
      
                             
 
        
  
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
Annexure-IVB 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
Input Format for Master Data Entry 
State: Implementing District: 
Whether LS/RS: Nodal District: 
Constituency: if LS MP : Report for 
(MM/YYYY) 
Block/Urban: Ward/Gram Panchayat 
1.	 Work Identity No. 
2.	 Work with Location 
3.	 Sector 
4.	 Scheme 
5.	 No. of SC and ST population covered 
by this work (SC) (ST) (Total) 
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
6. (a) Date of Receipt of Proposal 
(b) 	 Priority No. of Proposal as 
recommend by MP 
(c)	 Date of Sanction 
(d)	 Date of Work Commencement 
7. Work Cost (Rs.) 

===PAGE===

48 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
      
   
             
                                                                                         
8.	 Implementing Agency 
9.	 Date of Completion (dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
Original (as indicated on sanction order) 
10. 	 Does the work benefit SC and ST population?                SC Yes/ No 
(Indicate SC&ST population out of total population)     ST Yes/No 

===PAGE===

49 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
      
     
        
               
            
                                   
    
      
   
                     
  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Annexure-IVC 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
Input Format for Monthly Data Entry 
State: Implementing District: 
Whether Nodal District: 
LS/RS: 
1. Date of Completion Anticipated now 
(Actual if Completed)  (dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
Constituency: if LS Name Report for 
of MP : the month
 (mm/yyyy) 
Block Name : Village Name : 
2. Cumulative Expenditure (Rs.) 
3. Present Status
 (N – Not yet started, O – On going, C – Completed, 
D – Discontinued)
 
4. Physical Progress (%) 
5. 	Cumulative Amount Released (Rs.) 
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
6.  Date of last Release of Payment 
7.  If Completed, Amount of Saving (Rs.) 
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
8. Date of Refund of Saving to the District Authority 
9. 	 If Completed, Date of handing over to the
      User Agency 

===PAGE===

50
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 If Completed, Date of submission of Completion 
Certificate by Implementing Agency 
REMARKS IN ANY 
This space may be used to mention reasons for 
Discontinued Projects/Delay in execution/Non 
Completion, or any other remarks and steps taken 
for revival /early commencement and completion of 
the work 

===PAGE===

51 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
      
     
                  
            
               
          
 
 
          
 
       
 
       
 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Annexure-IVD 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
Format for Entry of Data by Implementing Agency 
State: District: 
MP: 
Whether LS/RS: Nodal District: 
(mm) (yyyy) 
Constituency: Report for the   
if LS month 
Implementing Agency 
1.	 Work Identity No. 
(Should be same as given by the District) 
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
2. 	 Date of Completion 
(Actual, if completed) 
3 	 Cumulative Expenditure (Rs.) 
4. 	 Present Status
 (N – Not yet started, O – On going, C – Completed, 
D – Discontinued) 
5 	 Physical Progress (%) 
6.	 Cumulative Amount Received (Rs.)                                                                                                                          
(dd) (mm) (yyyy) 
7. Date of last release of payment 

===PAGE===

52 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
   
   
 
8. 
9. 
10. 
If work completed, amount of savings refunded by the 
         implementing agency to the District Authority
Date of Refund of saving to the District Authority 
If work completed, date of submission of completion 
Report 
(dd) 
(dd) 
(mm) 
(mm) 
(yyyy) 
(yyyy) 
11.  REMARKS IF ANY 
This space may be used to mention reasons for 
discontinued Projects/Delay in execution/Non 
Completion, or any other remarks and steps taken 
for Revival/early commencement and completion 
of the work. 

===PAGE===

53 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
                    
   
             
         
                    
                    
                         
    
   
                     
       
    
                
   
    
            
 
               
                 
    
Annexure-IVE 
LIST OF SECTOR AND SCHEMES CODES
 
(This is sector wise type of illustrative works under MPLADS and is subject to the provisions 
in the Guidelines. This is not to be treated as an exhaustive list, nor a shelf of projects/master 
list of eligible items under MPLADS. 
I. DRINKING WATER FACILITY (01) 
1. Tube wells 
2. Water tanks 
3. Hand pumps 
4. Water tankers 
5. Piped Drinking Water Supply 
6. Other works for providing drinking water 
II. EDUCATION (02) 
1. Building for Government educational institutions 
2. Buildings for Government aided/un-aided
 educational institutions 
3. Computers for Govt. and Govt. aided educational
 institutions 
4. Construction of Dining Halls and Kitchen with 
Fixed Purifier and Solar Geyser for Mid-Day
 Meal Scheme. 
5. Other projects for educational institutions 
III. ELECTRICITY FACILITY (03) 
1. Projects for lighting of public streets and places 
2. Projects of Govt. Agencies for improvement of
 Electricity distribution infrastructure 
3. Others 
IV . HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (04) 
1. Buildings for hospitals, family welfare centers,
    public health care centers, ANM centers 
2. Procurement of hospital equipments for Govt.
 hospitals and dispensaries. 
3. Purchase of medical equipment costing not less 
than Rs. 5 lakh shall be permissible for Government 
Hospitals/Dispensaries. 
SECTOR SCHEME 
01 001 
01 002 
01 003 
01 004 
01 005 
01 999 
02 001 
02 002 
02 003 
02 004
02 999 
03 001 
03 002 
03 999 
04 001 
04 002 
04 003

===PAGE===

54 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
                  
                    
                  
   
      
                
                
   
                  
                
                  
             
                    
          
                 
            
                   
   
      
     
            
                  
4. Ambulances for Government 	 04 004 
5. Mobile dispensaries 	 04 005 
6. Crèches and Anganwadies 	 04 006 
7. Construction of Blood bank building and associated 04 007 
fixed and durable assets. 
8. Ambulance/Hearse run through NGOs	 04 008 
9. Other health and family welfare projects 	 04 999 
V .  IRRIGATION FACILITIES (05) 
1. Construction of public irrigation facilities 	 05 001 
2. Construction of flood control embankments 	 05 002 
3. Public Lift irrigation projects 	 05 003 
4. Public ground water recharging facilities	 05 004 
5. Other public irrigation projects 	 05 999 
VI. NON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES (06) 
1. Community Gobar-gas plant 	 06 001 
2. Non-conventional energy system/devices for
 Community use 06 002 
3. Others	 06 999 
SECTOR          SCHEME 
VII. OTHER PUBLIC FACILITIES (07) 
1. Construction of community centers* 	 07 001 
2. Construction of common shelters for cyclones, 
Floods and handicapped 07  002 
3. Construction of public libraries & reading rooms 07 003 
4. Crematoriums and structures on burial/cremation ground 
     including energy efficient crematoria 07 004 
5. Common work sheds for artisans 	 07 005 
6. Construction of bus-sheds/stops for public 
Transport passengers 07 006 
7. Buildings for cultural activities 	 07  007 

===PAGE===

55 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
   
            
              
             
    
     
             
       
       
          
          
 
 
 
 
         
       
      
    
    
    
   
8. Purchase of motor boats for flood and cyclone
 prone areas (not for individuals) 07 008 
9. Boundary walls for buildings permissible in the scheme 07 009 
10. Public parks 07 010 
11. Hearse  07   011 
12. Battery operated buses for Govt. agencies 07 012 
13. Fire tenders for Government organizations 07 013 
14. Other public works not covered elsewhere 07 999 
15. Retrofitting of essential lifeline buildings, 
viz Govt. hospitals, Govt. Schools and public
     buildings to be used as shelters in an emergency. 
07  014
16. Early Warning Systems for effective disaster 
mitigation. 
07  015
17. Others 07  999 
*(i) MPLADS funds can be used for construction of only one Community Hall in one village (the 
‘village’ implies a ‘revenue village’). 
(ii) in villages where one or more Community Hall already exist, whether constructed from 
MPLADS funds or from funds of any other Central/State Government Scheme, no further 
Community Hall can be constructed from MPLADS funds; and 
(iii) the Community Hall constructed with MPLADS funds will be accessible without restriction 
to all members of local community. 
(iv) construction of additional floors on the existing community halls in cities where there is 
shortage of land is permissible. 
VIII. RAILWAYS, ROADS, PATHWAYS AND BRIDGES (08) 
1. 	Construction of roads, approach roads, link roads,
 Pathways. 08 001 
2. 	Construction of foot paths. 08  002 
3. 	Construction of culverts and bridges. 08 003 
4. 	Level crossing at unmanned railway crossing. 08  004 
5. Construction of Road Under Bridge in lieu of Level 08  005
 Crossings (manned or unmanned). 
6. Construction of Staircase in case of Road Over Bridge 08  006
 (ROB) where it is not available. 
7. Construction of Foot Over Bridge (FOB) for crossing 08  007
 Railway tracks for pedestrians/road users. 

===PAGE===

56 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
    
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
       
    
      
       
              
         
          
        
        
         
            
          
             
           
             
8. Construction of Diversion Roads in lieu of Level 	 08  008
 Crossings. 
9. Construction of Road Under Bridges, where unauthorized 	 08  009
    crossing or cattle crossing of Railway Tracks is going on, 
due to construction of roads on either side of the 
    Railway Track. 
10. Construction of Approach Road to Railway Station. 08  010 
11. Construction of Circulating Area of Railway Station. 08     011 
12. Construction of additional Toilets for passengers in 	 08  012
      Circulation Area of Railway Station. 
13. Construction of Platforms at Railway Station. 08  013 
14. Construction of Foot Over Bridge at Railway Station. 08  014 
15. Construction of Platform Shelter in Station premises. 08  015 
16. Provision of Drinking Water in Station premises. 08  016 
17. Provision of Escalator/ Travellator at Stations. 08  017 
18. Provision of Solar Lighting at Station/ Level Crossing Gate.  08	  018 
19. Amenities for physically challenged persons at Stations 
(like ramps, separate toilets, etc.). 
20. Others 
IX. SANITATION AND PUBLIC HEALTH (09) 
1. Drains and gutters for public drainage 
2. Public toilets and bathrooms 
3. Garbage collection and night soil disposal Systems, 
earth movers including vehicles for local bodies 
4. Other works for sanitation and public health 
X. SPORTS (10) 
1. Buildings for sports activities 
2. Buildings for physical training institutions 
3. Buildings for multi-gym 
4. Fixed (immovable) sports equipment 
5. Multi gym equipments 
08  019
08  999 
09 001 
09 002 
09 003 
09 999 
10 001 
10 002 
10  003 
10 004 
10 005 

===PAGE===

57 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
          
         
         
 
  
        
            
    
          
              
           
        
               
            
          
            
               
               
      
              
     
                      
6. Construction of Playfields/Sports facilities at 	 10  006
 village-level/block-level. 
7. Construction of Multi-Purpose Halls for Games 10  007 
8. 	Laying of Synthetic Hockey and Football Turfs of 10  008
 permanent nature as per the International Standards. 
9. 	Construction of Vyamshalas (Gymnasium/Fitness Centres) 10 009 
10. Construction of Open-Air Mini Stadium with Concrete 	 10  010
      Sitting Area for spectators at District headquarters. 
11. Fixed garden gym machines	 10    011 
12. Other public works for sports activities 	 10 999 
XI. Works relating to Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries (11) 
1. Building for veterinary aid centers, artificial
 insemination centers & breeding centers 	 11  001 
2. Shelters for animals 	 11 002 
3. Construction of Veterinary Hospitals and 	 11  003
 Dispensaries. 
4. Construction 	of Buildings and Fixed Assets for 
Semen Banks. 11             004 
5. Others	 11  999 
XII.Works relating to Agriculture (12) 
1.	 Construction of Farmers’ Training and Assistance 12  001
 Centers 
2.	 Construction of Soil Testing Laboratories  subject to 12  002
 the condition that no consumables will be allowed. 
XIII. Works relating to Cluster Development for Handloom Weavers (13) 
1.	 Effluent Treatment Plants provided that such projects    13  001
       are for the community at large and not for any individuals. 
XIV . Works relating to urban development (14) 
1.	 Construction of Footpaths/Pedestrian ways. 14  001 
2.	 Construction of segregated Non-Motorized 14  002 
Vehicle (NMV) lanes/Cycle tracks. 
3. 	 Construction of Rainwater Harvesting Parks – 14  003 
demo projects – subject to only one per municipality. 
4. Community Toilets.	 14  004 

===PAGE===

58 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
Note: 
(a) 	 The works will be for the general public/community at large and not for any individuals. 
(b) The operational and maintenance costs will be borne by the user government/ministry/ 
department/organization. (This element will be ensured by the district authority before 
initiation of the work.) 
(c) 	 The construction of a building (like multi-purpose hall for games, vyayamshala, open-air 
mini stadium,  veterinary hospital and dispensary, semen bank, farmers’ training assistance 
centre and soil testing laboratory, etc.) will be undertaken only and only if the particular 
item is duly sanctioned and its operational and maintenance requirements and costs (like 
manpower, furniture, fixtures, office equipment, consumables, security etc.) will be duly met 
by the user government/ministry/department/organization. 
(d) It will be ensured by the district authorities that the essential objective and regular productive 
use of the assets created under the MPLADS will be duly met. 

===PAGE===

59 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-V 
Agreement Form
 
This Agreement is made on __________________________________ between the Governor of 
___________acting through ……………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………… Designation and Address) the District 
Authority hereinafter called the “First Party” of the First Part; 
And 
The Chief Executive of the (……………Name and address of Registered Society/Registered 
Trust), hereinafter called the “Second Party” of the Second Part. 
Whereas the First Party as the District Authority is the authority to get the development works 
implemented in ………..District, on the locally felt needs on the recommendation of the Member 
of Parliament, as per Guidelines on Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 
(MPLADS). 
And 
Whereas the Second Party is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 or a Trust, registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 or any Registration Act of any State 
Government is engaged in social service and welfare activities since (Date, Month, Year) for more 
than _________ years and is well established and reputed one in the field of social service and 
welfare activities with non-profit operation and with sound financial position. 
Now therefore it is hereby agreed between both the Parties to this Agreement and binds 
themselves to the following terms and conditions:­
1. The First Party shall undertake the construction of __________________ on the 
recommendation of the Member of Parliament as per the Guidelines on Member of Parliament 
Local Area Development Scheme, as amended from time to time (hereinafter referred to as 
MPLADS) for implementation of the work under the aforesaid MPLADS. 
2. The Second Party will be eligible to receive and manage the assets created out of the funds 
by the First Party from the Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme as per the 
Guidelines on the subject meant for the benefit and use by and/or for the public. 
3. A work at (Name of the Place, District and Pin code) regarding the construction of 
(Name of the work) costing the value mutually agreed upon by the parties and that has been 
duly recommended by ____________________ (the name of concerned MP) under the MPLAD 
Scheme, shall be undertaken by the First Party, to be handed over to the Second Party after 
completion of the construction. 
4. The First Party shall call for the necessary records from the Society/Trust such as the 
Memorandum of Association of the Society with special reference to Section 13 of the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 and the trust deed of the trust with special reference to Section 77 and 
Section 78 of the Trust Act and be satisfied with the existence and reputation of the organization, 
and its functioning as non-profit operations, transparency of performance, its sound financial 
position and its overall public reputation. 
5. The Second Party shall give a declaration to the First Party, to the effect that the Society/ 
Trust it represents is a live organization continuously functioning at least for the last three years 
engaging itself in social service and/or welfare activities. 

===PAGE===

60 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
            
     
   
 
       
        
  
6. The Second Party shall also give a declaration to the First Party, that the land and immovable 
property offered by the Second Party to the First Party for executing the developmental work is 
free from any encumbrances, free from pending litigation and not affected by the Urban Land 
(Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976. 
7. The Second Party shall also give a declaration to the First Party, that the assets created out of 
MPLADS funds for the society _____________________ or trust, is free from any encumbrances 
except advance taken for the purpose of this work/project. 
8. The Second Party shall ensure that durable assets, created out of MPLADS funds in the 
properties offered by the Second Party, must always be available for the use of or by the general 
public. In case it is found that the Second Party is not using the asset so created under MPLADS, 
for the purpose that was meant and/ the public do not have access to the said infrastructure, the 
First Party will issue necessary notice to the Second Party and after considering the views of the 
Second Party, if the First Party consider necessary will take over such asset and may recover the 
cost to the extent of investment made under MPLADS along with interest at the rate of 18%. 
9. The Central/State Government shall always and at all time be the absolute owner of the 
durable asset created out of the MPLADS funds. 
10. The Second Party shall not sell/transfer/otherwise dispose of any interest in or of such 
asset created out of MPLAD without the prior written approval of the State Government. After 
the written approval of the Government, the sale proceeds of the assets shall always vest and 
belong to the first party in all circumstances to the extent of investment made under MPLADS 
including the interest at the rate of 18%. 
11. The Second Party herein undertakes the full responsibility to ensure operation, maintenance
and upkeep of the asset which will be subject to periodical audit and inspection by the First Party 
or any of its representative/nominee duly authorized in this behalf. 
12. The Second Party shall submit to the First Party, annual report and its audited accounts on 
regular basis and within 90 days of the end of the Financial Year. 
13.  Since this indenture creates a future interest in the immovable property of the value of 
more than Rs.100/- this Agreement be registered under Registration Act in the respective district. 
14. In this indenture, wherever such an interpretation would be required to give the fullest 
possible scope and effect to the terms of the Agreement herein contained, the expressions District 
Authority and the Society or Trust shall include their respective successors or permitted assignees 
(Assignees). 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties here-to-have through their duly authorized representative 
executed this Agreement on day and year here-in-above-written. 
Executed for and on behalf of Executed for and on behalf of the 
the Governor of Society/Trust/Second Party by 
(State)__________________, 
by the District Authority	 ________ having authority to sign and execute 
this Agreement vide resolution dated ________ 
of _____________ 
By 
In presence of following witness:	 In presence of following witnesses: 
1. ________________________	 1. ________________________ 
2. ________________________ 	 2. ________________________ 

===PAGE===

61 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
                 
 
 
               
                                                            
       
I 
Annexure-VI 
MONTHLY PROGRESS REPORT UNDER 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME 
(MPLADS)
 
(Separate form for each Sitting/former Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha Member)
 
STATEMENT OF INFORMATION UNDER MPLADS FOR THE MONTH OF
 DD MM YYYY 
PARTICULARS: 
STATE: CONSTITUENCY/NODAL 
DISTRICT: 
Nodal District 
Address  ……………………………...
 ……………………………...
 ……………………………... 
Pin: 
TELEPHONE NUMBERS: 
STD CODE 
OFFICE: 
RESIDENCE: 
FAX:                 
MOBILE: 
e-mail: 
NAME OF MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT Shri / Smt. 
MPs Tenure  From 
DD MM YYYY
Address  …………………………….
 …………………………….
 …………………………….
 Pin: 
………………………….. ………………….. 
To
 DD MM YYYY 

===PAGE===

62 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. PHYSICAL PERFORMANCE
 
YEAR WORKS 
RECOMMENDED 
WORKS 
SANCTIONED 
WORKS 
COMPLETED 
WORKS NOT 
COMPLETED 
Number Estimated 
cost 
Number Estimated 
cost 
Number Actual 
Cost 
Number Expenditure 
incurred 
Expenditure 
To be 
incurred 
TOTAL 
III. FUNDS RECEIVED AND UTILISED  (Rs. In Lakh) 
YEAR FUNDS 
RECEIVED 
FROM GOI 
INTEREST 
ACCRUED 
INTEREST 
RECEIVED 
ON 
DISTRIBUTION 
TOTAL 
FUNDS 
FUNDS UTILISED BALANCE 
FUNDS 
SC 
& 
ST 
area 
Others Total 
TOTAL 
(a) Funds received from the Govt. of India 
(b) Amount of interest accrued on the  funds 
(c) Funds received on distribution 
(d) TOTAL (a+b+c) 
(e) Total cost of works sanctioned 
(f) Total Unsanctioned Balance available with the Constituency 
(d-e) 
(g) Actual Expenditure incurred by the Implementing Agency 
(h) Total funds available with the Constituency (d-h) 
(i) Funds required to complete the sanctioned works 
(j) Savings for Distribution to Successor MPs. 
(k) Number of works inspected by District Authority 
(a) During the month 
(b) Cumulative 

===PAGE===

63 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
  
    
 
              
               
 
 
 
____________________________ 
IV . PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL DETAILS OF WORKS IN SCHEDULED CASTE AREAS.
 
Year 
1 
Physical (Number of Works) 
2 
Financial (Cost of Works) (Rs. In lakh) 
3 
Recommended 
2(a) 
Sanctioned 
2(b) 
Completed 
2(c) 
Recommended 
3(a) 
Sanctioned 
3(b) 
Completed 
3(c) 
V . PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL DETAILS OF WORKS IN SCHEDULED TRIBE AREAS
 
Year 
1 
Physical (Number of Works) 
2 
Financial (Cost of Works) (Rs. In lakh) 
3 
Recommended 
2(a) 
Sanctioned 
2(b) 
Completed 
2(c) 
Recommended 
3(a) 
Sanctioned 
3(b) 
Completed 
3(c) 
Bank and Branch Name and Address ____________________________ 
Details: Saving Bank Account Number________________________________Branch Code 
Place 
Dated: Signature of District Authority 
Name in Capital Letter 
Seal and Designation 
Copy to Shri/Smt……………………………. Member of Parliament 
(Address) 
Note : 
(i) The District Authority of the Nodal District is required to furnish a consolidated report 
including the information pertaining to other Districts falling in the constituency where funds 
were transferred for MPLADS work execution on recommendation of the MP. 
(ii) Sanctioned amount is the cost of such schemes only for which financial sanctions have 
already been issued after finalizing plans and estimates. Cost of schemes which have got only 
administrative approval, and not financial sanction, should not be reported. 

===PAGE===

64 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
Annexure-VII 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
 
(MPLADS) 
WORK COMPLETION REPORT 
(To be furnished by the Implementing Agency to the District Authorities) 
It is certified that work No………….…, (description of work) sanctioned vide 
order No……………….. dated…/……/……. to be executed under MPLADS at a cost of 
Rs……….…….…(in figures and words) at ……………………………………(place) has 
been completed at a cost of Rs…………………….. and has been handed over to the User 
Agency……………………………………..……………….(Name and address) under intimation 
to the District Authority for use on……….............(date). 
The amount of savings i.e Rs………………..……………….(in figures and words) has 
been remitted to the MPLADS Account of the District Authority vide Cheque No……………. 
dated…...…….drawn on…………….…………….. (Bank with address). Details of the work are 
in the enclosed format. 
Signature of the Implementing Agency 
Date: 
Place: 
District: 

===PAGE===

65 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
    
 
 
  
      
         
  
Annexure-VIII 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
 
(MPLADS)
 
Form of Utilization Certificate for funds received under MPLADS for the year …………….. 
and for the …………………………….MP constituency for Shri ………………. 
S.No. Letter No. 
and date Amount For the 
Year 
Instalment 
No. 
Total	 
Certified that out of Rs………….of Grants-
in-aid sanctioned during the year………… 
in favour of Shri………., MP of the 
Constituency………………….. by the Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
Government of India vide letters mentioned on 
the margin and Rs…….on account of unspent 
balance of the previous year, a sum of Rs…… 
has been utilized for the purpose of execution of 
works. recommended by MP concerned and as 
permissible under the guidelines on MPALDS 
for which it was sanctioned. The balance 
amount of Rs…….remaining unutilized at the 
end of the year will be carried forward to the 
next year…………….. 
2.	 Having been fully satisfied I certify that the conditions on which the grants-in-aid was 
sanctioned have been duly fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that 
the money was actually utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned. The following 
kinds of checks were exercised by me while furnishing this Utilization Certificate:-
1. 
2. 
3. 
Place Seal	 Signature of District Authority 
Date 	 Name (capital letters) 
Designation 
Telephone 

===PAGE===

66 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
Annexure-IX 
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
 
(MPLADS)
 
AUDIT CERTIFICATE
 
It is certified that we have audited the annual Balance Sheet and accounts as on 31st March…………. 
(year) and Receipt and Payment and Income and Expenditure Accounts for the year ending 
on that date of Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) for Shri 
……………….. of the constituency …………………, from the books of accounts, records and 
other documents produced to us by the District Authority and the executing agencies. 
In our opinion and to the best of our knowledge and according to the explanations given to 
us and subject to our observations as detailed below we report that:­
(a) The Balance Sheet read together with notes thereon gives a  true and correct view of 
the state and affairs of the MPLADS as on 31st March ………..(year). 
(b) The Income and Expenditure Accounts gives a true and correct view of the surplus of 
funds over expenditure of Rs……………for the year ending 31st March………… 
(year) 
(c) The Receipt and Payment Accounts give a true and correct view of the transaction 
of the Scheme for the year ending 31st March………… (year). 
(d) Not more than one Bank Account is operated for the Scheme. 
(e) No funds are kept in the form of Fixed Deposits. 
(f) Interest accrued in Saving Bank Account has been taken as receipt for use on the 
MPLAD Scheme. 
(g) Bank Reconciliation Statement has been prepared regularly for every month till this 
month…... (year). 
(h) Cash Book is being written on real accrued basis. 
(i) Expenditure shown in the Income and Expenditure Account is properly reflected in 
the Utilization Certificates. 
(j) There is no case of diversion of funds. 
(k) The following Reports certified by the Competent Authority of the District 
Administration form part of the Audit Certificate:-

===PAGE===

67 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 	 Physical and Financial Progress Report for the year ending 31st March…….… 
(Year). 
(ii) 	 Cumulative Physical and Financial Progress Report up to 31st March…..….. (Year). 
(In case of Lok Sabha, MPs right from the inception and for Rajya Sabha MP for the 
period of individual MP’s tenure). 
(iii)	 Physical and Financial Details of works in Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe areas 
upto 31st March……….(Year): 
Physical and Financial 
details of works in 
SC/ST areas 
(1) 
Physical (Number of works) 
(2) 
Financial (Cost of works) 
(Rs. in lakh) 
(3) 
Sanctioned 
2(a) 
Completed 2(b) Sanctioned 
3(a) 
Completed 
3(b) 
SC Area 
ST Area 
(iv)	 MPLADS funds Utilization Certificate. 
(l) There is no audit objection in so far as the said accounts audited by us.  	(In case there is 
any pending audit objection and objections raised during the present audit, please furnish 
the details. (In case of the Audit objections indicated by the Chartered Accountant, the 
same shall be attached to this Certificate with seal and signature). 
(m) All works undertaken under the MPLADS by all Trusts/Societies receiving funds under 
the MPLADS in the year ending 31st March------- (year) have been audited and found to 
be in order. 
(The certificate shall be on the auditing firm’s letter head clearly indicating Signature, Name, 
Address, telephone, fax, and email of the auditor(s) with seal). 

===PAGE===

68 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Annexure-X 
ONE MP – ONE IDEA 
Format for submission of applications 
APPLICANT DETAILS 
1. Applicant Individual | Team | Organization 
2. Applicant(s) Name(s) & 
Occupation 
a. 
b. 
c. 
3. Contact Address of Applicant(s) 
4. Telephone/Mobile/Email of 
Applicant(s) 
INNOV ATION DETAILS 
5. Name/Title of Innovation 
6. Place of use for the Innovation 
7. Users of Innovation 
8. Area of Innovation a) Education and 
Skills 
b) Health 
c) Agriculture 
d) Water and 
Sanitation 
e) Housing and 
Infrastructure 
f) Energy and 
Environment 
g) Community and 
Social Service 
h) Any other (please 
specify) 
9. Problem Statement 
[The problem could preferably be a 
major challenge faced in your area] 
a) What is the problem? 
b) Whom is it affecting-geographically and  
demographically 
10. Summary of Innovation a) Provide a detailed description of the proposed 
solution [You can include tables, images and 
figures here with proper captions, if need be]. 
b) What makes this innovation different than the 
other solutions currently in practice? If no other 
solutions are currently available, discuss the 
factors that make your innovation viable as a real 
solution. 
c) Details of Awards/Recognitions already received 

===PAGE===

69 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11. Putting the Innovation into Action a) Do you need any of the following, to make your 
innovation scale up and reach its users: 
i) Funding 
ii) Support in Prototyping 
iii) Research and Development Support 
iv) Partnerships 
v) Support in Marketing and Sale 
b) What will be the potential impact of this solution, if 
implemented. 
12. Status a) Please describe the current status of the proposed 
solution 
i) Idea Stage 
ii) Prototype 
iii) Field Trials /Pilot [Please furnish details] 
iv) Already in the market [Please furnish details] 
13. Intellectual 
Property Right 
a) Please indicate whether innovation proposed has been 
patented and/or is covered by Intellectual Property 
Right either by you or by anyone else. An affidavit to 
this effect be attached. (If answer is not known, this 
be stated) 
14. Business Model a) If you are looking at commercialization of your 
innovation and need financial support, please furnish 
the following details: 
I. Brief Business Plan 
II. Specific markets & geographical segments your 
solution will be catering to 
III. Details of any funding received till date (whether 
government, venture capitalist, family, etc.) 
IV . Funding (including loans) that you are now seeking 
and how you plan to use the funds. Please give 
forward projection of your funding requirements 
for the next three years, including projected cash 
flows. 
V. If you are planning a new venture, please give 
projected financials, investment sought, plan for 
use of funds, revenue model as well as model for 
growth/scaling up. 

===PAGE===

70 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
Notes: 
a) Items 1-13 are mandatory, while Items 14 is optional. 
b) Apart from the Award Money, the ‘One MP - One Idea’ contest will not  provide any 
financial support for commercialization. 
c) Please send any documentary proof about your innovation along with the application form. 
It could be in the form of documents, photographs, video, newspaper clipping, etc. 
d) Please attach resume of applicant(s). 
e) By participating in this contest, the applicant agrees to abide by the guidelines laid by the 
competition. 
f) If there are no appropriate candidates, the award may not be given in a particular year 
g)	 The decision of the Selection Committee will be final and binding on all matters related to 
this Contest. 
PLACE: 
DATE:                                          
SIGNATURE OF THE APPLICANT(s) 
DECLARATION 
[I/We declare that this innovation is our original contribution. I/We have read the competition 
guidelines and agree to abide to them.] 
SIGNATURE OF THE APPLICANT(s) 

===PAGE===

71 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
 
     
Annexure-XA 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
 
Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
 
Certificate of Honour 
This is to certify that Shri/Smt/Km……………………………….………………… son/ 
daughter of Shri……………………………………………………………………... resident of 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
has participated in One MP – One Idea Competition held at………… (Name of the Constituency/ 
State). 
2. A cash award of Rs.……….......................................……………..is hereby awarded to 
Shri/Smt/Km.……………………………………….as first prize/second prize/ third prize. 
3. Details of problems/solution ……………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………..………………………………………………………… 
…………………… 
Signature of District Magistrate 
Dated: 

===PAGE===

72 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
 
 
     
Annexure-XB 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
 
Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
 
Certificate of Appreciation 
This is to certify that Shri/Smt/Km……………………………….………………… son/ 
daughter of Shri……………………………………………………………………... resident of 
…………………………………………………………… 
has participated in One MP-One Idea Competition held at ……… (Name of the Constituency/ 
State). 
2. The Certificate of Appreciation is hereby conferred upon him/her in recognition of his efforts 
for providing innovative solution under One MP-One Idea competition. 
3. Details of problems/solution …………………………………………………………………… 
………………………………………………………………………….………………………… 
…………………………………………..…………….…………………………………………… 
……………………………………… 
Signature of District Magistrate 
Dated: 

===PAGE===

73 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
Annexure-XI 
SAMPLE OF PLAQUE FOR MPLADS WORKS
 
Name of Member of Parliament ……………………………………………………..
 
Name of work sanctioned …………………………………………………….
 
Date of Commencement ……………………………………………........…....
 
Date of Completion ………………………………………………………
 
Cost of work sanctioned …………………………………………………….
 
Share of funding from MPLADS/other source ……………………………………..
 
Date of Inauguration ……………………………………………………..
 

===PAGE===

74 
GUIDELINES OF MPLADS
    
Annexure-XII 
Information for Registration of Nodal Agencies under MPLAD Scheme into 
CPSMS and for transfer of funds under the scheme through ECS/ RTGS 
(All fields are mandatory) 
Agency Name……………………………………………………………………………… 
Address Line 1……………………………………………………………………………… 
Address Line 2……………………………………………………………………………… 
City………………………………………………………………………………………… 
State………………………………………………………………………………………… 
District……………………………………………………………………………………… 
Pin Code…………………………………………………………………………………… 
Contact Person……………………………………………………………………………… 
Phone………………………………………………………………………………………… 
E-Mail……………………………………………………………………………………… 
Bank Detail : (Separate account details in respect of each MP) 
Name of the MP…………………………………………………………………………… 
Account No………………………………………………………………………………… 
*Account Name…………………………………………………………………………… 
Name of the Bank………………………………………………………………………… 
Branch Code………………………………………………………………….…………… 
Branch Name & Address…………………………………………………………………… 
IFSC Code………………………………………………………………………………… 
*Account should be in the name of Commissioner/District Collector/Magistrate/ 
Dy. Commissioner 
Signature of Nodal Authority with Seal 

===PAGE===

